Streamlining Java Programming: Uncovering Well-Formed
Idioms with IdioMine
Yanming Yang
The State Key Laboratory of
Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University, China
yanmingyang@zju.edu.cn
Xing Hu∗
The State Key Laboratory of
Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University, China
xinghu@zju.edu.cn
Xin Xia
Zhejiang University, China
xin.xia@acm.org
David Lo
Singapore Management University,
Singapore
davidlo@smu.edu.sg
Xiaohu Yang
The State Key Laboratory of
Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University, China
yangxh@zju.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Code idioms are commonly used patterns, techniques, or practices
that aid in solving particular problems or specific tasks across multi-
ple software projects. They can improve code quality, performance,
and maintainability, and also promote program standardization
and reuse across projects. However, identifying code idioms is sig-
nificantly challenging, as existing studies have still suffered from
three main limitations. First, it is difficult to recognize idioms that
span non-contiguous code lines. Second, identifying idioms with
intricate data flow and code structures can be challenging. More-
over, they only extract dataset-specific idioms, so common idioms
or well-established code/design patterns that are rarely found in
datasets cannot be identified.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel approach,
named IdioMine, to automatically extract generic and specific
idioms from both Java projects and libraries. We perform program
analysis on Java functions to transform them into concise PDGs, for
integrating the data flow and control flow of code fragments. We
then develop a novel chain structure, Data-driven Control Chain
(DCC), to extract sub-idioms that possess contiguous semantic
meanings from PDGs. After that, we utilize GraphCodeBERT to
generate code embeddings of these sub-idioms and perform density-
based clustering to obtain frequent sub-idioms. We use heuristic
rules to identify interrelated sub-idioms among the frequent ones.
Finally, we employ ChatGPT to synthesize interrelated sub-idioms
into potential code idioms and infer real idioms from them.
We conduct well-designed experiments and a user study to eval-
uate IdioMine’s correctness and the practical value of the extracted
idioms. Our experimental results show that IdioMine effectively
extracts more idioms with better performance in most metrics. We
∗Corresponding author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0217-4/24/04
https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639135
compare our approach with Haggis and ChatGPT, IdioMine outper-
forms them by 22.8% and 35.5% in Idiom Set Precision (ISP) and by
9.7% and 22.9% in Idiom Coverage (IC) when extracting idioms from
libraries. IdioMine also extracts almost twice the size of idioms
than the baselines, exhibiting its ability to identify complete idioms.
Our user study indicates that idioms extracted byIdioMine are well-
formed and semantically clear. Moreover, we conduct a qualitative
and quantitative analysis to investigate the primary functionalities
of IdioMine’s extracted idioms from various projects and libraries.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering → Maintaining software.
KEYWORDS
Code Idiom Mining, Code Pattern, Large Language Model (LLM),
Clustering
ACM Reference Format:
Yanming Yang, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang. 2024. Stream-
lining Java Programming: Uncovering Well-Formed Idioms with IdioMine.
In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’24), April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639135
1 INTRODUCTION
A code idiom is a programming pattern used to solve a specific
problem efficiently and concisely [1, 64], and it is commonly en-
countered across diverse software projects [ 2]. According to Di
Nucci et al. [40], if a piece of code is written in a natural and in-
tuitive manner, it can be considered idiomatic. Well-established
idioms can reduce ambiguity [55], optimize code performance and
efficiency [58], and enhance code readability and understanding
for programmers [54]. They also help establish coding standards
and best practices in development activities [49] and facilitate their
reuse in various contexts, such as data processing and resource
management [40, 55]. In addition, developers widely recognize the
significance of writing idiomatic code, evident from the abundance
of relevant resources dedicated to this topic [36]. For example, A
dedicated book on C++ idioms can be found on Wikibooks [3], and
similar guides are also available for Java [4] and JavaScript [5, 6].
ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal Yanming Yang, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang
An idiomatic JavaScript guide on GitHub [6] has gained consider-
able popularity, amassing over 22.8k stars and 3.2k forks. Therefore,
mining code idioms is critical for enhancing the efficiency and
effectiveness of software development and maintenance [44].
Several existing studies focus on code idiom extraction. Alla-
manis et al. [36] proposed a pioneering model, Haggis, a machine
learning-based statistical method that mines code idioms based
on code syntax. However, their approach relies heavily on manual
annotations and is unable to identify code idioms with interleaved
dataflow [64]. This indicates that Haggis is a labor-intensive ap-
proach, and less experienced programmers may find it difficult to
generalize code patterns. To overcome this limitation, Sivaraman
et al. [64] introduced dataflow information to improve the tree rep-
resentation method used by Allamanis et al. [34, 36]. However, this
approach only resulted in a marginal enhancement in Haggis’s per-
formance, as it failed to merge the full semantic context of source
code to identify code idioms.
Extracting code idioms with complete semantic information
from software projects remains a challenging task due to three
unresolved limitations in existing studies:
1) Existing studies cannot extract idioms that are composed of non-
contiguous lines of code from a code fragment. Existing methods, as
demonstrated by previous studies [36, 64], are unable to extract code
idioms from non-contiguous lines of code. This restriction poses a
challenge, as many idioms involve non-contiguous lines within a
function. For instance, Listing 1 showcases an idiom extracted by
IdioMine that involves non-contiguous lines of code. This particu-
lar idiom [7] is derived from code that utilizes the com.rabbitmq
library, where it calculates the execution time of a code fragment
by determining its start and end times. As the code in lines 1 and 3
are typically non-contiguous in most projects, current approaches
are unable to detect such widely-used idioms.
Listing 1 An idiom with non-contiguous lines of code.
1 long start = System . cur re nt Ti me Mil li s ();
2 # code snippet
3 long end = System . cur re nt Ti me Mil li s ();
4 long time = end - start ;
2) Existing studies cannot effectively identify idioms that encom-
pass intricate data flow and code structures. A significant drawback
of recent research on idiom mining [ 64] is that it captures only
one-way information flow. This limitation may result in the loss of
important semantic and data flow in code fragments, making it chal-
lenging to identify complex code idioms that involve intricate data
and control flows. This difficulty persists irrespective of whether
these idioms are constructed from contiguous or non-contiguous
lines of code. As an example, Listing 2 exhibits an idiom, which
is extracted from the source file named “FileManager.java” [8].
This idiom is a commonly used pattern for Git-based projects, e.g.,
JGit. It is used to push modifications to a specific Git repository
based on its parent directory. Its intricate control and data flow are
contained within a contiguous code fragment (specifically, Lines
3-7). This fragment encompasses an if-else statement and an
inner loop structure featuring an additional if statement. Unfor-
tunately, existing techniques fail to extract such idioms due to their
intricate control and data flow as well as non-contiguous code lines.
Note that the previous study [64] addressed the contiguity of code
lines within idioms and the complexity of data and control flow as
distinct issues in their Limitation Section. Hence, we also consider
this limitation as a separate concern from the first one discussed.
Listing 2 An idiom with complex code structure.
1 if (! file . exists () || ! file . isDirectory ()){
2 # code snippet
3 } else { for ( Repository r : reps ){
4 if ( r . getDirectory (). getParentFile (). getName (). equals ( projectName ))
5 { Git git = new Git ( refreshed );
6 RevCommit commit = git . commit (). setMessage ( message )
7 . setAll ( true ). call ();}}}
3) Existing studies can only produce dataset-specific idioms, rather
than generic idioms. According to the public definition [2], a code
idiom is characterized as a code fragment that exhibits frequent re-
currence across various software projects. This implies that solely
mining code idioms from specific datasets may overlook certain
generic idioms that possess wider applicability but occur infre-
quently within that dataset. However, current techniques heavily
rely on probability distributions of code fragments in the dataset
to identify idioms. They only consider frequently used code frag-
ments in the dataset as idioms, but some less common fragments in
that dataset may still represent well-established and easy-to-reuse
design/code patterns in other projects. This limitation may prevent
existing techniques from recognizing certain real idioms. Listing 3
illustrates the use of an idiom [9] that encapsulates transactional
behavior for structuring the project named Stuctutr [10]. This id-
iom incorporates the well-known “Command Design Pattern” [11].
Although the design pattern appears only twice in the dataset, it
can be easily reused elsewhere because of its primary functionality,
which involves encapsulating the information required to perform
an action or trigger an event at a later time.
Listing 3 A design pattern with few occurrences in datasets.
1 Services . command ( securityContext ,
2 T r an s a ct i o nC o mm a n d . class ). execute ( new S t r uc t rT r a ns a c ti o n (){
3 @ Override public Object execute () {
4 if (( lockType == LockType . READ ) &
5 ( graphDb instanceof A b s t r a c t G r a p h D a t a b a s e )){
6 (( A b s t r a c t G r a p h D a t a b a s e ) node . getGraph Database ())
7 . getLockManager (). getReadLock ( node ); }
8 return null ; } };
To overcome the aforementioned constraints, our paper puts
forth a novel approach, IdioMine, that can automatically recognize
high-quality code idioms in an unsupervised manner. IdioMine
comprises three distinct phases, i.e., idiom representation construc-
tion, frequent sub-idiom mining, and semantic idiom identification.
Specifically, IdioMine analyzes Java functions to create concise
program dependency graphs (PDGs), which seamlessly integrates
dataflow and control information for a better understanding of the
code’s semantics. It then establishes a chain structure called Data-
driven Control Chain (DCC) to extract code lines with contiguous
semantic meanings as sub-idioms from PDGs. In phase two, we
employ GraphCodeBERT to generate code embeddings for these
sub-idioms and a density-based clustering technique to identify
frequent sub-idioms. In phase three, we identify related sub-idioms
among frequent ones by applying predefined rules. Afterward, with
the aid of ChatGPT’s capabilities, IdioMine synthesizes related
sub-idioms as potential idioms and identifies real ones from them.
We evaluate IdioMine’s effectiveness through extensive experi-
ments on project-level and library-level datasets, and perform a user
Streamlining Java Programming: Uncovering Well-Formed Idioms with IdioMine ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
study to explore the practical value of extracted idioms. In addition,
we perform a quantitative and qualitative analysis of IdioMine’s
extracted idioms, thereby discovering novel insights. After com-
paring the results of IdioMine with baselines, we observe that
IdioMine outperforms them in many evaluation metrics. Specif-
ically, IdioMine exhibits exceptional performance in identifying
idioms, surpassing Haggis and ChatGPT by 22.8% and 35.5%, re-
spectively, in terms of Idiom Set Precision (ISP). Additionally, our
approach excels in Idiom Coverage (IC), outperforming baselines by
9.7% and 22.9% when extracting idioms from libraries. IdioMine’s
performance is impressive: the size of the extracted idioms is nearly
twice that of the baselines, indicating the ability of our approach
to identify both specific and generic idioms in a more complete
manner. Moreover, IdioMine’s extracted idioms outperform the
baselines in terms of code completeness and semantic clarity, with
an average improvement of 0.22 and 0.19, respectively. In conclu-
sion, our study makes the following primary contributions:
(1) We introduce a novel approach, called IdioMine, for automati-
cally extracting both dataset-specific and generic idioms from
Java code. The replication package is available at [12].
(2) We devise DCC, a chain structure, that enables us to extract
sub-idioms with contiguous semantic meanings from PDGs.
(3) We conduct well-designed experiments to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of IdioMine and design a user study to validate that
IdioMine’s extracted idioms exhibit superior quality in com-
parison to the baselines.
(4) Notably, we examine the primary functionalities of idioms ex-
tracted from every Java project and library using IdioMine
through both quantitative and qualitative analysis.
2 PROBLEM DEFINITION
Definition of Code Idioms. A code idiom is a code fragment that
demonstrates two key characteristics. Firstly, it exhibits recurring
patterns across multiple software projects [2]. Secondly, it serves a
singular semantic purpose [36]. Code idioms thus can encompass
non-contiguous lines of code, exemplified by Listing 1, and involve
intricate data and control flow, as demonstrated in Listing 2. Consid-
ering the formalization of code idioms in the prior study [36], which
primarily emphasizes their syntactic structures while overlooking
the completeness of semantic aspects, we propose an extension
to enhance the original version. Specifically, we define idioms as
sets of interconnected nodes, I = {𝑉 , 𝐸}, by data or control flow,
𝐸 = {𝐸𝑑, 𝐸𝑐 }, in PDGs, representing the completed semantic and
syntactic structure of idioms.
What Idioms are Not. 1) Simple APIs or method invocations
are not code idioms. The previous study [ 36] illustrated the
difference between code idiom mining and API mining and
clearly stated that simple APIs or method invocations (e.g.,
parcel.writeDouble($Var);) are not code idioms due to limited
syntactic structure. However, their tool, Haggis, identified some
common API usages and method invocation patterns with
richer syntactic structures in the dataset as code idioms, such
as “Location.distanceBetween($(Location).getLatitude(),
$...);” and “ Toast.makeText(this, $stringLit,
Toast.LENGTH_SHORT).show();”. Actually, certain API-based
usages can be regarded as code idioms. Because when developers
2
1
34 7
5
6
8
PDG
2
1
3
4
5
6
CFG
7
8
1
3
4 78
56
AST
2
Phase 1: Idiom Representation Construction
Java Functions
a) PDG Construction
Data-driven Control Chains
b)DCC generation
Sub-idiomatic Code Patterns
c) Code Transformation
Phase 2: Frequent Sub-idiom Mining
1237Var 1 8
Var 234
Var 3
5
456… …
d) Embedding
e) Clustering
Phase 3: Semantic Idiom Identification
Sub-idioms
ChatGPT
Code Synthesis 
Prompts
Potential Idioms 
Semantic Idioms
Prompt-based
Training
h) Idiom 
Identification
g) Prompt 
Answering
f) Sub
-idiom Synthesis
Code Synthesis
Figure 1: The overall framework of IdioMine.
consistently employ a particular API in a specific manner to
achieve a desired functionality or implement a common design
pattern, it can be recognized as an API-based code idiom. Hence,
our study abides by this rule to not regard single APIs or method
invocations as idioms.
2) While one-line statements can be classified as code idioms, sim-
ple return statements and certain types of assignment statements
with limited semantic significance are excluded from this catego-
rization. The previous study [ 36] acknowledged one-line state-
ments as code idioms, exemplified by the top idiom “ Elements
$name=$(Element).select($StringLit);” identified by Haggis.
However, to enhance the mining of more meaningful idioms,
our study chooses not to classify simple return statements (i.e.,
return $var; ) and two specific types of assignment statements
(i.e., this.$Var = Var; and super.$Var = Var; ) as code idioms.
3 IDIOMINE
In this section, we introduce the technical framework of our pro-
posed approach, IdioMine. Specifically, we provide an overview of
the framework and then explain each phase.
3.1 Overall Framework
Our approach, IdioMine, endeavors to extract code idioms within
software projects. The framework ofIdioMine, shown in Fig. 1, has
three phases: 1) idiom representation construction, 2) frequent sub-
idiom mining, and 3) semantic idiom identification. In phase one, we
conduct program analysis to construct a PDG for each Java function,
which comprehensively integrates the data flow and control flow
of Java functions. Additionally, we develop a chain structure, DCC,
which extracts code fragments possessing contiguous semantic
meanings from PDGs as sub-idioms. In phase two, we encode sub-
idioms using GraphCodeBERT and utilize density-based clustering
to identify frequently occurring sub-idioms. Finally, we identify
interrelated sub-idioms based on specific rules and employ ChatGPT
to synthesize them as potential code idioms. Using ChatGPT’s
powerful capability [37], we can accurately identify real idioms from
the pool of candidates. In the following sections, we will present a
step-by-step explanation to facilitate readers’ understanding.
3.2 Phase 1: Idiom Representation Construction
Existing methods cannot handle complex idioms made up of❶ non-
contiguous lines of code and ❷ intricate data and control flow. This
is because they place a strong emphasis on code syntax during pro-
gram analysis, disregarding the semantic connections and data flow
between lines of code. To overcome these limitations, we employ