Ppt4J: Patch Presence Test for Java Binaries
Zhiyuan Pan
The State Key Laboratory of
Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China
zy_pan@zju.edu.cn
Xing Hu∗
The State Key Laboratory of
Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China
xinghu@zju.edu.cn
Xin Xia
Software Engineering Application
Technology Lab, Huawei
Hangzhou, China
xin.xia@acm.org
Xian Zhan
The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University
Hong Kong, China
chichoxian@gmail.com
David Lo
School of Computing and Information
Systems, Singapore Management
University
Singapore
davidlo@smu.edu.sg
Xiaohu Yang
The State Key Laboratory of
Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China
yangxh@zju.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
The number of vulnerabilities reported in open source software has
increased substantially in recent years. Security patches provide the
necessary measures to protect software from attacks and vulnera-
bilities. In practice, it is difficult to identify whether patches have
been integrated into software, especially if we only have binary
files. Therefore, the ability to test whether a patch is applied to the
target binary, a.k.a. patch presence test, is crucial for practitioners.
However, it is challenging to obtain accurate semantic information
from patches, which could lead to incorrect results.
In this paper, we propose a new patch presence test framework
named Ppt4J (Patch Presence Test for Java Binaries). Ppt4J is
designed for open-source Java libraries. It takes Java binaries (i.e.
bytecode files) as input, extracts semantic information from patches,
and uses feature-based techniques to identify patch lines in the bina-
ries. To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed approach Ppt4J,
we construct a dataset with binaries that include 110 vulnerabilities.
The results show that Ppt4J achieves an F1 score of 98.5% with rea-
sonable efficiency, improving the baseline by 14.2%. Furthermore,
we conduct an in-the-wild evaluation of Ppt4J on JetBrains IntelliJ
IDEA. The results suggest that a third-party library included in the
software is not patched for two CVEs, and we have reported this
potential security problem to the vendor.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering → Software reliability.
KEYWORDS
Patch Presence Test, Binary Analysis, Software Security
∗Corresponding Author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0217-4/24/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639231
ACM Reference Format:
Zhiyuan Pan, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, Xian Zhan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang.
2024. Ppt4J: Patch Presence Test for Java Binaries. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’24), April 14–20,
2024, Lisbon, Portugal. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3597503.3639231
1 INTRODUCTION
The reuse of open source libraries is widespread [25]. Vulnerabili-
ties in open-source software have become a major concern, posing
significant threats to software and users [ 17]. For example, the
number of Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs [6]) re-
ported during the first quarter of 2023 has already exceeded the
total number of CVEs reported in 2016 [ 37]. Although upstream
developers may discover and fix these vulnerabilities over time,
vulnerable versions may still propagate to downstream software or
libraries, potentially compromising the security of the systems that
rely on them.
Since open source libraries are frequently distributed as binary
files, it is essential that developers and users in the software supply
chain be aware of potential vulnerabilities in the libraries they
introduce. For example, Log4Shell (CVE-2021-44228 [33]) is a well-
known vulnerability in Apache Log4j [ 12] that can lead to the
execution of arbitrary code. If a software development team has
integrated Log4j into their project, developers should verify if their
version of Log4j is vulnerable to Log4Shell. In other words, they
have to confirm whether the binary contains the patch for CVE-
2021-44228.
The above process of testing whether a security patch is applied
to the program binaries is called patch presence test [44]. However,
traditional approaches that only take binary files for analysis cannot
be utilized for patch presence tests due to the coarse granularity [
44].
For example, binary bug search tools, such as Genius proposed
by Feng et al. [
10], identify vulnerability types but cannot test
the presence of an arbitrary patch commit. Similarly, binary code
search tools, such as Tracy proposed by David et al. [8], find similar
functions but cannot tell whether the function is patched or not.
To accurately test the presence of a patch in fine granularity,
Zhang et al. propose FIBER [44], a patch presence test framework
for C/C++ binaries that extracts a localized part of patchdiff [40] for

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal Zhiyuan Pan, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, Xian Zhan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang
signature generation. BScout [7], another framework that targets
Java binaries, utilizes the entire patch diff.
However, existing studies on patch presence test for Java binaries
still have the following two limitations:
• Inability to capture minor changes. The features ex-
tracted by current approaches are unable to handle some sub-
tle modifications to the source code (e.g., changing method
call parameters, branch conditions and statements outside
method bodies).
• Limited patch semantic. The diffs utilized in existing ap-
proaches cannot perfectly reflect semantic changes (i.e., ac-
tual discrepancies in program behavior) in the patches, lead-
ing to the inclusion of extraneous information that does not
exist in the patches.
Given the widespread application of Java, such as server-side pro-
grams and Android applications, the limitations mentioned above
highlight the need for a more comprehensive and accurate approach.
To address these limitations, we propose a new patch presence test
framework named Ppt4J (Patch Presence Test for Java Binaries).
Ppt4J exploits the correspondence between source code features
and binary features. It first extracts features from the source code
to generate semantic changes. Then, the semantic changes guide
Ppt4J to perform source-to-binary feature matching and feature
queries. Finally, Ppt4J provides the test result by summarizing the
queries.
To evaluate the effectiveness of Ppt4J, we construct a dataset
with binaries that include 110 vulnerabilities in total. We compare
Ppt4J with a state-of-the-art Java patch presence test framework,
BScout [7], in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. To
evaluate the effectiveness of Ppt4J in real-world software, we per-
form an in-the-wild evaluation by testing the presence of patches
in various versions of JetBrains IntelliJ IDEA [38]. The results on
the dataset demonstrate that Ppt4J achieves an F1 score of 98.5%,
improving the baseline by 14.2% while maintaining reasonable effi-
ciency. The results of the in-the-wild evaluation indicate thatPpt4J
remains accurate in real-world scenarios. In addition, our evalua-
tion reveals that Ppt4J has the ability to uncover instances where
application vendors (e.g., JetBrains) have failed to apply security
patches to third-party libraries they import, further demonstrating
its utility in practical settings.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
(1) We propose a novel framework for Java binaries, Ppt4J, to
accurately test the presence of patches by highlighting se-
mantic code differences from patches.
(2) We construct a dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of Ppt4J
by obtaining source code from GitHub repositories, labeling
ground truths, and building binaries.
(3) We evaluate Ppt4J using the dataset and real-world soft-
ware. Ppt4J outperforms the baseline and is able to test the
presence of patches in real-world scenarios.
(4) We release the replication package of Ppt4J1, including the
source code of Ppt4J and our dataset, to facilitate future
research.
1https://github.com/pan2013e/ppt4j
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2
introduces the background concepts for this paper and motivates
the problem using an example. Section 3 presents the approach of
Ppt4J. Section 4 describes the baseline approach, the preparation
for our dataset, and the evaluation metrics. Section 5 presents the
experimental results and our case study. Section 6 and Section 7
discusses comparsions with the baseline and threats of validity.
Section 8 summarizes the related work. Section 9 concludes the
paper.
2 BACKGROUND
In this section, we discuss the background of the patch presence
test task and provide a motivating example to illustrate the main
idea of Ppt4J.
2.1 Patch Presence Test
The task of patch presence test and its scope of the problem are
defined as follows:
Definition. Given a security patch diff 𝑃 from a specific open
source library in the upstream, patch presence test works by evalu-
ating target program binaries 𝐵 on a boolean function
𝑓 : (𝐶1, 𝐶2, 𝑃, 𝐵) → { True, False},
where 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 refer to the upstream source code of the software
right before and after patch 𝑃. 𝐵 refer to the standard Java bytecode
in this paper and should be provided by the user. Among 𝐶1, 𝐶2
and 𝑃, at least two of them must be provided and the third can be
automatically derived.
Patch presence test checks if a specific patch is applied to the
provided target binaries [44]. In this task, the upstream source code
𝐶1, 𝐶2 and the target binaries 𝐵 are supposed to belong to the same
library, but the target binaries can be compiled from any version
of source code. The function 𝑓 has two possible return values. If
𝑓 returns true, we confirm the existence of a patch commit within
the binaries, and vice versa.
The advantage of patch presence test lies in its ability to detect
specific patch commits. This enables users to specifically check for
security patches that they are most concerned about. Thus, the
potential risks that arise from vulnerabilities can be mitigated.
2.2 Motivating Example
Existing patch presence test work for Java binaries takes the com-
plete diff (i.e., the exact differences in characters) as input to analyze
patch presence. However, existing work is limited as the whole diff
will introduce “semantic redundancy”, that is, some (-) and (+)
lines end up with no semantic changes, which may introduce unre-
lated information.
Intuitively, to accurately test the presence of a patch, we should
extract precise semantic changes from diff that reflect all seman-
tic information while not including unrelated information. We il-
lustrate the importance of semantic changes by using real-world
examples shown in Figure 1.
In the first case of Figure 1, the diff introduces a try-catch
block with six diff lines. However, there are no differences be-
tween lines 1, 2, and 5, 6, except for indentations. If we trim the
Ppt4J: Patch Presence Test for Java Binaries ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
1 - XmlPullParser parser = Xml.newPullParser();
2 - XPPAttributesWrapper attributes = new XPPAttributesWrapper(parser);
3 + try
4 + {
5 + XmlPullParser parser = Xml.newPullParser();
6 + XPPAttributesWrapper attributes = new XPPAttributesWrapper(parser);
(a) CVE-2017-1000498 [28]
1 - Document<T> doc = parser.parse(is);
2 + XMLStreamReader reader = StaxUtils.createXMLStreamReader(is);
3 + Document<T> doc = parser.parse(reader);
(b) CVE-2016-8739 [27]
1 - if (A == Algorithm.none && B == 2 && C == 0) {
2 - return Mapper.deserialize(base64Decode(...), JWT.class);
3 + if (B == 2 && C == 0) {
4 + if (A == Algorithm.none) {
5 + return Mapper.deserialize(base64Decode(...), JWT.class);
6 + } else {
7 + throw new InvalidJWTSignatureException();
8 + }
(c) CVE-2018-11797 [30]
Figure 1: Examples of “semantic redundancy”: diff lines ex-
cerpted from full security patches.
leading spaces/tabs, these lines would be identical. In other words,
the actual semantic-related change of the patch is the try-catch
environment, rather than these four statements. Similar cases in-
clude moving statements into if-else, for, or while blocks. In
the second case (Figure 1b), lines 1 and 3 differ due to the change
of a variable (i.e., is − →reader). The change originates from
calling the method createXMLStreamReader. Thus, the code that
causes the actual semantic change is line 2, not lines 1 and 3. In the
third case (Figure 1c)2, we can observe that an if block is deleted
and another if block is added. But after inspecting the code, the
only semantic change is line 7, that is, throw an exception when
B == 2 && C == 0 && A != Algorithm.none.
From these examples, we conclude that the differences in charac-
ters may not correspond to semantic changes. Motivated by this, we
illustrate the idea of our work, which highlights semantic changes
and is carried out in the following steps:
Step 1 Feature extraction. We extract features for patch-relevant
Java source code and binaries.
Step 2 Semantic change generation.We generate semantic changes
for a patch based on the original diff and the extracted fea-
tures in Step 1.
Step 3 Feature matching. We match sequences of source-level
features and binary-level features extracted in Step 1.
Step 4 Patch presence evaluation.Instructed by semantic changes
in Step 2 and feature matching results in Step 3, we evaluated
the patch presence for the binaries.
3 APPROACH
In this section, we first provide an overview of Ppt4J and its archi-
tecture. Then, we introduce each component in detail.
2The code in the figure is simplified for illustration. The original version
is available at https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-jwt, with commit hash
0d94dcef0133d699f21d217e922564adbb83a227
3.1 Overview of Ppt4J
The framework of Ppt4J is depicted in Figure 2. Ppt4J takes the
source code and binaries as input. The output of the framework
is the patch presence status (i.e., true or false) of the binaries.
Additionally, the framework provides user-configurable parameters,
which we will discuss in detail later in this section. By utilizing
this framework, Ppt4J is able to efficiently analyze binaries and
accurately test the presence of patches.
3.2 Feature Extraction
This component extracts rule-based features for Java code lines and
bytecode blocks.
3.2.1 Pre-Process. Raw source code and binaries are not ideal for
feature extraction due to certain programming practices, e.g., a
statement might be splitted into multiple lines. Additionally, a single
instruction may not accurately represent the intended semantic
information of a Java statement, which is usually compiled into a
group of instructions.
To address this issue, Ppt4J incorporates filters that aggregate
discrete elements. For instance, we merge split lines in Java source
code to create logical lines from abstract syntax trees (ASTs). As
for binaries, we propose to split instruction sequences into logi-
cal blocks using line number information in binaries. Sometimes,
line numbers may be absent or stripped. We discuss such case in
Section 6.1.
3.2.2 Feature Types. Each line of logical source code or each logical
bytecode block corresponds to a set of features that can include
zero or more features. Our goal is to select feature types that reflect
a large proportion of the Java language specifications and Java VM
specifications [1]. To achieve this, we select a variety of simple
and non-trivial feature types. This ensures that Ppt4J is capable
of capturing significant information and minimizing the risk of
missing important details. As shown in Figure 3, the feature types
in our definition include literals, method invocations, field accesses,
array creations, and special instructions.
To be specific, “literal” contains compile-time constant values,
fields, and expressions. “Method invocation" contains calls to static
methods, virtual methods, and interface methods. We exclude method
invocations that can be implicitly generated by the compiler fre-
quently. The excluded methods are<init> in Object and String-
Builder, toString, valueOf, append and longValue. For other
method invocations, we include a method’s name, owner (i.e., the
class to which it belongs), and actual parameter types. “Field access”
and “array creation”, as their names suggest, contain read/write to
mutable fields and creation of array objects, respectively. Finally,
when extracting “special instructions”, we seek source code ele-
ments or instructions that meet one of the following characteristics:
(1) Distinctive calculations. ❶ Special binary operators: shift
and instanceof; ❷ Special unary operators: ++ and -- (in-
cluding prefix and postfix).
(2) Control flow manipulations:return statements, throw state-
ments, if blocks and loops.
(3) Synchronization primitives, e.g., monitorexit instruction
and synchronized blocks.