HFUZZER: Testing Large Language Models for
Package Hallucinations via Phrase-based Fuzzing
Yukai Zhao∗†, Menghan Wu†, Xing Hu†‡, Xin Xia†
∗School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
†The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{yukaizhao2000, menghanwu, xinghu}@zju.edu.cn, xin.xia@acm.org
Abstract—Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely used
for code generation, but they face critical security risks when
applied to practical production due to package hallucinations, in
which LLMs recommend non-existent packages. These halluci-
nations can be exploited in software supply chain attacks, where
malicious attackers exploit them to register harmful packages. It
is critical to test LLMs for package hallucinations to mitigate
package hallucinations and defend against potential attacks.
Although researchers have proposed testing frameworks for fact-
conflicting hallucinations in natural language generation, there is
a lack of research on package hallucinations. To fill this gap, we
propose HFUZZER, a novel phrase-based fuzzing framework to
test LLMs for package hallucinations. HFUZZER adopts fuzzing
technology and guides the model to infer a wider range of
reasonable information based on phrases, thereby generating
enough and diverse coding tasks. Furthermore, HFUZZER ex-
tracts phrases from package information or coding tasks to
ensure the relevance of phrases and code, thereby improving the
relevance of generated tasks and code. We evaluate HFUZZER on
multiple LLMs and find that it triggers package hallucinations
across all selected models. Compared to the mutational fuzzing
framework, HFUZZER identifies 2.60× more unique hallucinated
packages and generates more diverse tasks. Additionally, when
testing the model GPT-4o, HFUZZER finds 46 unique hallucinated
packages. Further analysis reveals that for GPT-4o, LLMs exhibit
package hallucinations not only during code generation but also
when assisting with environment configuration.
Index Terms—Large Language Models, Package Hallucination,
Fuzzing
I. I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown significant
potential across various domains and are widely used for code
generation [1]. However, despite their success in tackling com-
plex tasks, LLMs face critical challenges related to security
and privacy [2], [3], [4], [5]. One major issue is hallucination,
where LLM-generated outputs may appear credible or authen-
tic but are factually incorrect, self-contradictory, or unrelated
to inputs [6], [7]. This issue has been extensively studied in
natural language generation (NLG) [8]. Recently, Liu et al. [5]
explore hallucinations in code generation and classify code
hallucinations into 19 types. One critical hallucination type is
package hallucination, which is defined as LLMs recommend
packages or libraries that do not exist [9], [10].
Compared to other types of code hallucinations, package
hallucination poses a higher risk of malicious exploitation,
introducing new software supply chain security threats [11],
‡Corresponding Author
[9]. Such attacks often fall under package obfuscation inci-
dents, where developers are misled into importing packages
they do not expect, which is one of the most serious problems
in supply chain security [10], [12]. Figure 1 shows an example.
A user first prompts the model to generate a Python program
that implements a simple HTTP/2 server with some specific
requirements. After generating the code, the user then asks
how to install the packages used in the generated program. In
response, the model recommends two packages to be installed
via pip. Upon inspection, it is found that the package “h2” is
correct, while “hyper-h2” is a hallucinated package that does
not exist in the package repository (PyPI [13]). If an attacker
registers this hallucinated package in the repository and em-
beds malicious code within it, uninformed developers may
inadvertently install and execute it, exposing themselves to
supply-chain attacks. Moreover, researchers and practitioners
have developed various LLM agents for end-to-end software
development (such as Devin [14]), which are capable of using
tools and executing commands [15]. This further increases
the success rate of package hallucination-based attacks, as
malicious packages may be downloaded into the development
environment without the developers’ awareness.
Spracklen et al. [10] and Krishna et al. [9] construct datasets
and empirical studies on package hallucinations. While valu-
able, their studies are limited by the size of the dataset
and cannot cover a wide range of code generation scenarios.
Although Drowzee [16] is proposed to test LLMs for fact-
conflicting hallucinations in NLG, research on code hal-
lucinations—particularly on package hallucinations—remains
scarce. Inspired by testing software to help discover failures,
we propose to test LLMs for package hallucinations. However,
testing LLMs faces the following two key challenges:
• Challenge 1: How to cover as many code generation
scenarios for LLMs as possible? To cover these scenarios,
we need to generate adequate and diverse coding tasks to
test LLMs. Although Drowzee [16], MORTAR [17], and
MetaQA [18] are proposed to generate natural language ques-
tions with single correct answers (e.g., “Did Haruki Murakami
and Bob Dylan ever win the same award?”), they cannot
complete the generation of coding tasks with multiple correct
implementations. Moreover, approaches that mutate existing
tasks using predefined mutation rules often result in limited
task diversity, as the variations are bounded by the original task
structure and mutation rules. Although such strategies may be
2745
2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
2643-1572/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00225
Object: HTTP/2 requests
Predicate: handle
Complement: styled HTML page
Create a Python program that implements a simple HTTP/2 server that preserves 
the style of incoming requests. The server should be able to handle GET and 
POST requests while maintaining the original formatting and headers of the 
requests. It should respond with a styled HTML page that reflects the style of the 
incoming request. Your implementation should ensure that the server is easy to 
set up and run, allowing users to test their HTTP/2 requests effortlessly.
from h2.config import H2Configuration
from h2.connection import H2Connection
from h2.events import RequestReceived, DataReceived, StreamEnded
HTML_TEMPLATE = """
<!DOCTYPE html> … …
How to install these python packages used?
pip install h2 
pip install hyper-h2
Object: GET and POST requests 
Predicate: respond
Complement: easy to set up and run
Fig. 1. An Example of Package Hallucination
effective in adversarial attacks like jailbreak attacks, they are
inadequate for generating diverse coding tasks.
• Challenge 2: How to generate code-relevant tasks to test
LLMs for package hallucinations? Non-code-related tasks
introduce conflict in the prompt of the model (e.g., asking
an LLM to generate code for the task of “Win the Nobel
Prize in literature”), which undermines the effectiveness of
testing LLMs for package hallucinations. Therefore, automat-
ically generated tasks must be restricted to code-related ones.
However, leveraging LLMs or applying simple mutation-based
approaches often cannot ensure that the constraint is met,
especially when diversity is also desired. This issue may lead
to the generation of non-code-related tasks.
To overcome these challenges, we propose HF UZZER,
a novel phrase-based fuzzing framework designed to test
LLMs for package hallucinations. ForChallenge-1, HFUZZER
adopts fuzzing technology and leverages LLMs as a task
generation engine, which enables HFUZZER to generate ad-
equate tasks. To increase the diversity of tasks, HF UZZER
guides LLM to generate tasks based on phrases. Since LLM
has been pre-trained on a large amount of data, when
phrases are input, the model can use this knowledge to
infer a wider range of reasonable information, thereby im-
proving the diversity of tasks. For instance, as shown in
Figure 1, HF UZZER leverages LLM to generate a coding
task based on phrases HTTP/2 requests, handle, and
styled HTML page . In the generated task, LLM in-
fers the task “implement an HTTP/2 server” based on the
phrase HTTP/2 requests. For Challenge-2, HF UZZER
extracts phrases from package information or coding tasks
to ensure that the phrases are relevant to the code, thereby
improving the relevance of the generated tasks and code.
For instance, the phrase HTTP/2 requests is more con-
ducive to the model inferring code-related information than
Nobel Prize . Inspired by the fact that subject-predicate-
object triples can summarize information in three phrases,
HFUZZER formulates package information or coding tasks
as phrase compositions ⟨Object, P redicate, Complement⟩
to obtain richer phrases and avoid redundancy. Among
them, Object represents the object processed by the pack-
age or the coding task (e.g., HTTP/2 requests and
Get and Post Requests in Figure 1), P redicaterep-
resents the method applied to Object (e.g., handle and
respond in Figure 1), and Complement represents ad-
ditional relevant details (e.g., styled HTML page and
easy to set up and run in Figure 1). Based on the
extracted phrases, HF UZZER guides LLM to consider the
packages related, and then restricts the tasks to those that can
be solved by using packages, thus increasing the likelihood of
generating code-related tasks that require calling packages.
To evaluate HFUZZER, we use the descriptions of the top
100 Python packages in libraries.io [19] as the initial input and
set the budget of a run as 1000 rounds. We count the number
of unique hallucinated packages to evaluate the effectiveness
of HF UZZER and cluster the generated tasks to analyze
diversity. We compare HFUZZER with GPTFUZZER-A, which
is adapted from GPTFuzzer [20], and use nine models as tester
and target models to comprehensively assess the generaliz-
ability of HFUZZER. The tester model is the model used by
HFUZZER and GPTFUZZER-A; the target model is the model
tested. Our results show that HFUZZER successfully triggers
package hallucinations in all target models and outperforms
GPTFUZZER-A across all tester models, finding on average
2.60x more unique hallucinated packages. Tasks generated by
HFUZZER are more diverse than those from GPTFUZZER-A.
We also find 46 unique hallucinated packages recommended
by GPT-4o. Further analysis shows that for GPT-4o, package
hallucinations occur not only during code generation but also
when assisting with environment configuration.
The contributions of our paper are summarized as follows:
• We design a new phrase-based coding task generation
method that leverages the knowledge of the LLM to infer
a wider range of reasonable information based on phrases,
thereby generating diverse tasks.
• To our knowledge, our framework is the first to introduce
the concept of fuzzing into testing LLMs for package
hallucinations. The code can be found on our website [21].
• We conduct a comprehensive evaluation by using differ-
ent LLMs as tester and target models. Results show that
HFUZZER successfully triggers package hallucinations in
all target models and outperforms GPTF UZZER-A on all
tester models. Tasks generated by HFUZZER are also more
diverse than those generated by GPTFUZZER-A.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
Figure 2 provides an overview of HF UZZER, which in-
cludes two parts (i.e., Phrase Extraction and Fuzzing Loop)
and resembles the fuzzing process (Seed Pool Initialization,
Seed Selection, Seed Mutation, and Execution). The tester
model LLMtester is the model used by HF UZZER, and the
target model LLMtarget is the tested model. HFUZZER uses
package information, which includes package names (e.g.,
“requests”) and their descriptions (e.g., “Python HTTP for
Humans”), as input and tests closed-source models solely
by accessing their input/output. The fuzzer first executes
the program under test with inputs from testers to initialize
the seed pool (Seed Pool Initialization). Similarly, in the
Phrase Extraction phase, HFUZZER extracts phrase compo-
sitions ⟨Object, P redicate, Complement⟩ from the package
2746
A. Phrase Extraction B. Fuzzing Loop
𝑳𝑳𝑴𝒕𝒆𝒔𝒕𝒆𝒓
Phrase Composition
Object
Predicate
Complement
name:
"requests",
description:
"Python HTTP for Humans.“ … …
Package Info
Phrase 
Composition
Seed Selection
Seed
You are a programming assistant. Your 
task is to generate a coding task … …
Coding task
N PackagesHallucination
Risk Score
Power 
Adjustment
Task Generation
Hallucination 
TriggeringHallucination 
Evaluation
Seed Pool 
Expansion
import http2
class HTTP2Server: 
… …
Task: “Create a Python script to … …”
Code: “Import os … …”
Results
 Non-existent Package : “http2-h2”
Otherlanguage Package : “cv2” … …
You are a phrase extractor 
who can extract three phrases 
from a coding task … …
Phrase Composition
Object
Predicate
Complement
You are a phrase extractor 
who can extract phrases from 
the package description … …
You are a coding assistant whose 
task is  generate Python code… …
You are a coding assistant that 
determines python packages  … ...
𝑳𝑳𝑴𝒕𝒆𝒔𝒕𝒆𝒓
𝑳𝑳𝑴target
𝑳𝑳𝑴target
pip install http2-h2 h2
𝑳𝑳𝑴𝒕𝒆𝒔𝒕𝒆𝒓
Fig. 2. The overview of HF UZZER. Phrase Extraction is discussed in Section II-A, Seed Selection is discussed in Section II-B1, Task Generation is discussed
in Section II-B2, Hallucination Triggering is discussed in Section II-B3, Hallucination Evaluation is discussed in Section II-B4, Power Adjustment is discussed
in Section II-B5, and Seed Pool Expansion is discussed in Section II-B6.
information by LLMtester to construct three corresponding
phrase pools, which consist of the seed pool (Section II-A).
Subsequently, HFUZZER enters the Fuzzing Loop phase. Sim-
ilar to selecting seeds from the seed pool (Seed Selection),
in each round, HF UZZER selects a seed consisting of three
phrases from the seed pool according to the power of phrases
(Section II-B1). The power is defined as the potential of a
phrase, which determines the probability of the phrase being
selected. The seed is used byLLMtester to generate a coding
task (Section II-B2). Unlike traditional fuzzing generates new
inputs by mutating seeds (Seed Mutation), HFUZZER gener-
ates new coding tasks by recombining different phrases. In the
Hallucination Triggering phase, HFUZZER asks LLMtarget
to generate code for the provided task, and then guides it to
recommend packages required to execute code, which corre-
sponds to the Execution of fuzzing. HFUZZER performs hallu-
cination evaluation on packages recommended byLLMtarget
to calculate the Hallucination Score (HS), which is used to
measure the package hallucination triggering on LLMtarget
(Section II-B4), and adjusts the power of related phrases
according to the HS (Section II-B5), thereby guiding future
selection toward under-explored phrases. To expand the seed
pool, for tasks that trigger package hallucinations, HFUZZER
extracts new phrase compositions from them and adds new
phrase compositions to the seed pool (Section II-B6). The
process continues until the query budget is exhausted. Finally,
we get the generated coding tasks and corresponding model
outputs. In the above process, to handle incorrect responses,
HFUZZER discards intermediate results if the output format is
invalid (e.g., missing tags) and allowsLLMtester to respond
with ”None” when it is unable to generate reasonable output.
HFUZZER verifies packages by querying package indices (e.g.,
PyPI) to avoid false positives due toLLMtester output errors.
LLMtarget is also allowed to refuse unrelated coding tasks.
Additionally, compared to traditional parsing methods, LLMs
provide stronger semantic understanding and natural language
processing, allowing them to handle complex inputs.
A. Phrase Extraction
HFUZZER formulates package information as the phrase
composition⟨Object, P redicate, Complement⟩ and extracts
the phrase composition from each package’s information to
construct the seed pool. This seed pool is divided into
three corresponding phrase pools with power, each containing
phrases of one component type. The three phrases of the
composition are defined as follows:
• Object represents the object processed by the package.
• P redicaterepresents the method applied by the package.
• Complement represents a phrase that captures essential
contextual details beyond theObject or P redicate, providing
additional context when applicable.
To achieve this, HFUZZER leverages LLM to extract phrase
compositions from package information. HFUZZER configures
the system prompt to define the target of phrase extraction
from package information and provides an example to specify
the expected response format. In the user prompt, HFUZZER
provides the package information to the model to obtain
phrases. These phrases are added to their respective phrase
pools and assigned an initial power, influencing the selection
process described in Section II-B1. To handle cases where
the model cannot extract a specific phrase due to insufficient
information, the prompt instructs the model to answer “None”.
This design helps minimize the negative impact of incomplete
package descriptions on phrase quality.
Example A. The description of package pre-commit is
“A framework for managing and maintaining multi-language
pre-commit hooks”. We formalize it as ⟨pre-commit hooks,
managing and maintaining, multi-language support⟩. Among
them, pre-commit hooks represents the objects pro-
cessed by this package, managing and maintaining
represents the methods provided by this package, and
multi-language supportsupplements the features of
this package. HFUZZER extracts such information from pack-
age information to construct the seed pool.
B. Fuzzing Loop
Similar to fuzzing, we consider the following process as one
round and repeat it until the budget is exhausted.
1) Seed Selection: In directed fuzzing, fuzzers assign scores
to the seeds and prioritize those with higher scores for muta-
tion. HFUZZER adopts a similar strategy for seed selection. In
this paper, each seed consists of three phrases corresponding to
the phrase composition described in Section II-A, to increase
the amount of information and provide richer context for LLM.
Specifically, HFUZZER applies a weighted random selection
algorithm to construct a seed: one phrase is selected from
2747