Day 01 | Unit 1-2

Unit 1

【原文】
Development of Nursing
1. State the contributions of Florence Nightingale to the development of nursing;
2. Identify the four concepts essential to nursing;
3. State the a ims of nursing.

【翻译】
护理的发展1.介绍Florence Nightingale对护理发展的贡献； 2.确定护理必不可少的四个概念； 3.阐述护理的目的。

【原文】
Nursing hasbeen called the oldestart and the youngest profession. The word nurse evolved from the Latinword nutricius which means" nourishing ". When looking at the historical development of nursing, most nurse historians① agree that nursing or the care of the ill and injured hasbeendone since the beginning of human life and has generally been a woman'srole. A mother caring for a child in a cave is an example of early nursing.
Nursing before 19

【翻译】
护理被称为最古老的艺术和最年轻的职业。"护士"一词源自拉丁语"nutricius" ，意思是"滋养"。在看待护理的历史发展时，大多数护士史学家①一致认为，护理或护理病人、伤者是从人生之初就开始的，一般都是女性的'角色。在洞穴中照顾孩子的母亲是早期护理的一个例子。19岁之前的护理

th

【原文】
century was developed slowly and fastidiously. No special training was provided or required for the person who served as nurses, and the image of nurses was bound to the servant or simple career.②
The emergence of professional nursing is usually attributed to the influence of Florence Nightingale.③ Florence Nightingale, who was born in 1820 in a wealthy and in tellectual family in England, was well educated and her education included several ancient and modern languages, literature, philosophy, history, science, mathematics, religion, art and music.
It was expected that she would follow the usual path of a wealthy woman of those days: to be married, bearing children and maintaining an eleganthome. However, Nightingale chose to become a nurse, and such decision was shaped by three major influences in her life. Firstly,
she was dissatisfied with what she viewed as the dull, routine life-style of the up-class women of her day. Secondly, she had received a" classical education which is equal to that of mostmen of her day". This education provided her with an understanding of the circumstances of the world in which she lived. Thirdly, she became aware of the inadequate care being provided in hospitals as she accompanied her mother on visits to the ill, and she believed that she was" called by God to help others and to improve the well-being of mankind".
At that time, hospitals were terrible places and nurses were, in most cases, the dregs of society. Thus, hospitals were cer tainly not places for up-class women to go and her family was
①
②
③

【翻译】
世纪是缓慢而挑剔地发展起来的。没有为担任护士的人提供或要求特殊培训，护士的形象与仆人或简单的职业生涯息息相关。②专业护理的出现通常归因于弗洛伦斯·南丁格尔的影响。③弗洛伦斯·南丁格尔（ Florence Nightingale ） ， 1820年出生于英国一个富裕的知识分子家庭，受过良好教育，她的教育包括几种古代和现代语言、文学、哲学、历史、科学、数学、宗教、艺术和音乐。预计她将遵循当时富裕女性的通常道路：结婚，生孩子，保持优雅的家庭。然而，南丁格尔选择成为一名护士，这种决定是由她生活中的三个主要影响因素塑造的。首先，她对当时上流社会女性平淡无奇的日常生活方式感到不满。其次，她接受了"与当时大多数男性同等的古典教育"。这种教育使她了解了她所生活的世界的情况。第三，她在陪同母亲探访病人时意识到医院提供的护理不足，她相信自己"被神呼召去帮助别人，改善人类的福祉"。当时，医院是可怕的地方，护士在大多数情况下是社会的渣滓。因此，医院肯定不是上流社会的女性可以去的地方，她的家人是① ② ③

护 理史学 家。
从 事护理 ⼯作 的⼈没 有也⽆ 需经 过任何 特殊 的训练, 护 ⼠的形 象与仆 ⼈或 从事简 单职 业的⼈ 相提 并论。
专 业护理 的出 现多归 因于南 丁格 尔的影 响。

1

【原文】
in an uproar over her decision. Nightingale studied nursing in secret and she visited Kaiserswerth ① and received training there for three months at the age of 31.
The outbreak of the CrimeanWar ② provided Nightingale an opportunity to organize a small band of nurses to work for the British hospital at Scutari in Turkey ③. When they arrived, what she found was a hospital" so crowded that patien tslay on the floor, still in bloody uniforms, bath equipment, cutlery, and laundry facilities were either non-existent or nearly so". With great compassion, Nightingale and her nurses began to work, they changed the military hospitals by setting up diet kitchens, a laundry, recreation centers, and reading rooms, and organizing classes for orderlies. Through her efforts, Florence Nightingale made a great difference in the care of the British soldiers, and her efforts were largely responsible for dramatic reductions in the death ra te④ of soldiers from 42 percent to 2 percent. This great success changed the prejudices against women and elevated the status of all nurses.⑤
After the war, Nightingale returned to England. She continued to devote herself to nursing by establishi ng school of nursing based on her knowledge of what was effective nursing.⑥
The Nightingale Training School for Nurses at St. Thomas' Hospital in London was the first nursing school which could provide systematic training programs for nurses in the world. And eventually, manyschools in Europe and Americaused the Nightingale model for nursing education.
In addition, Florence Nightingale was a productive writer. She wrote and published countless ar ticles and papers. Her most famous written documents were Notes on Nursing ⑦
and Notes on Hospital ⑧. Through those publications, she shared her ideas about nursing and nursing education, thus her contribu tions to nursing are numerous and far-reaching ⑨.
Modern nursing hasbeen developed rapidly since Florence Nightingale established professional nursing and nowits unique body of knowledge hasbeen formulated and the function or focus of nursing hasbeen defined.
In defining the knowledge base of nursing, fourmain concepts need to be briefly
10.
in troduced here since they dominate and shape professional nursing practice 

【翻译】
对她的决定感到不满。南丁格尔秘密学习护理，她访问了Kaiserswerth ① ，并在31岁时在那里接受了三个月的培训。Cri平均战争的爆发②为南丁格尔提供了一个机会，组织一小群护士在土耳其Scu tari的英国医院工作③。当他们到达时，她发现医院"非常拥挤，病人躺在地板上，仍然穿着血淋淋的制服，洗澡设备，刀具和洗衣设施要么不存在，要么几乎不存在"。南丁格尔和她的护士们怀着极大的同情心开始工作，他们通过建立减肥厨房、洗衣房、娱乐中心和阅览室以及为护理人员组织课程来改变军队医院。通过她的努力，弗洛伦斯·南丁格尔（ Florence Nightingale ）在照顾英国士兵方面发挥了巨大作用，她的努力在很大程度上使士兵的死亡率从42 ％大幅降低到2 ％。这一巨大的成功改变了对女性的偏见，提升了所有护士的地位。⑤战后，南丁格尔回到英国。她根据自己对有效护理的知识，建立了护理学校，致力于护理。⑥ The Nightingale Training School for Nurses at St.伦敦托马斯'医院是世界上第一所可以为护士提供系统培训计划的护士学校。最终，欧洲和美国的许多学校将南丁格尔模式用于护理教育。此外，弗洛伦斯·南丁格尔（ Florence Nightingale ）是一位富有成效的作家。她撰写并发表了无数的文章和论文。她最著名的书面文件是《护理笔记》⑦和《医院笔记》⑧。通过这些出版物，她分享了她对护理和护理教育的看法，因此她对护理的贡献是众多且影响深远的⑨。自弗洛伦斯·南丁格尔（ Florence Nightingale ）建立专业护理以来，现代护理发展迅速，现在其独特的知识体系已经形成，护理的功能或重点已经确定。在定义护理知识库时，需要简要介绍四个主要概念10.由于它们主导并塑造了专业护理实践 

The four

【原文】
concepts are: the person, environment, health, and nursing.
Person: As the recipient of care, the person is the focus of professional nursing. The
1
person is viewed as an integrated whole which consists of bio-psycho-social aspects.
Because

【翻译】
概念是：人、环境、健康和护理。人员：作为护理的接受者，人员是专业护理的重点。1人被视为一个完整的整体，由生物-心理-社会方面组成。因为

① 德 国凯撒 斯畏 斯城。
② 克 ⾥⽶亚 战争 。
③ ⼟ ⽿其斯 库塔 ⾥。
④ 死 亡率显 著下 降。
⑤ 这 ⼀巨⼤ 成就 改变了 社会对 妇⼥ 的偏⻅, 也 提升了 所有 护⼠的 地位。
⑥ 她 继续投 身于 护理事 业, 利 ⽤她 对护理 的认 识建⽴ 了⼀ 所护理 学校。
⑦ 《护理 札记》。
⑧ 《医院 札记》。
⑨ 她 对护理 事业 的贡献 是巨⼤ ⽽意 义深远 的。

10 护 理专业 实践 。

1 ⼈ 被视为 是由 ⽣理 - ⼼理 - 社会 诸⽅⾯ 构成 的⼀个 整体 。

2

【原文】
Unit 1 Development of Nursing persons are greater than the sum of their parts, ①

【翻译】
单元1护理人员的发展大于其各部分的总和， ①

【原文】
we cannot simply learn about persons by viewing their components in isolation. The interactions of all the parts are what make persons unique.
Environment: Environment is an important concept in nursing because a healthy environment leads to healthy people. Physical, social, political, economic and cultural environments all influence health. A pleasant and comfortable environment has a significant relationship to health.
Health: Healt hhasbeen defined in manyways. However, nurses agree the definition from WHO,
that is" health is a state of complete physical,

【翻译】
我们不能通过孤立地查看他们的组件来简单地了解人。所有部分的相互作用是使人独一无二的原因。环境：环境是护理中的一个重要概念，因为健康的环境会导致健康的人。身体、社会、政治、经济和文化环境都会影响健康。宜人舒适的环境与健康密切相关。健康：健康在很多方面都有定义。然而，护士同意世卫组织的定义，即"健康是完全身体的状态，

mental,

【原文】
and social well-
being, not merely the absence of disease or infirmity".②
Nursing: Nursing is both an art and a science. Art may be viewed as the systematic application of knowledge or skills. As a science and a profession, nursing is experiencing evolutional growth of itsown. There is no single definition of nursing. However, the theme of helping and caring is inherent in nursing.③
The aims or the focuses of nursing havebeen clearly identified today. Nursing practice involves four areas related to health — health promotion,
restoration, and care of the dying ④.

【翻译】
和社会福祉，而不仅仅是没有疾病或疾病"。②护理：护理既是一门艺术，也是一门科学。艺术可能被视为知识或技能的系统应用。作为科学和专业，护理正在经历自身的发展壮大。护理没有单一的定义。然而，帮助和关怀的主题是护理所固有的。③今天已经明确了护理的目的或重点。护理实践涉及与健康相关的四个领域—健康促进运动，恢复和临终护理④。

【原文】
health maintenance,

【翻译】
守护健康

health

【原文】
Health promotion means helping people develop resources to maintain or enhance their well-being. Health maintenance nursing activities are those actions that help clients to maintain their health status. Health restoration means helping people to improve health following health problems or illness. Care of the dying involves comforting and caring for people of allages while they are dying.

【翻译】
健康促进意味着帮助人们开发资源，以维持或提高他们的福祉。健康维护护理活动是那些帮助客户保持健康状况的活动。恢复健康是指帮助人们在健康问题或疾病后改善健康状况。照顾垂死者涉及安慰和照顾所有年龄段的人。

【原文】
Daily Language
1. When is the Nurses Day?
护⼠节是哪⼀天?
2. It's on May 12 eachyear.
每年 5 ⽉ 12 ⽇为护⼠节。
3. Why do people choose the day?
为什么选择那⼀天?
4. We choose that day in honor of Florence Nightingale, who established modern nursing. She was born on May 12

【翻译】
日常语言1.护士节是什么时候？ 护⼠节是哪⼀天 ？ 2.每年5'月12日。每年5 ⽉ 12 ⽇为护⼠节。 3。人们为什么选择这一天为什么选择那⼀天？ 4.我们选择这一天是为了纪念建立现代护理的弗洛伦斯·南丁格尔（ Florence Nightingale ）。她出生于5月12日

th

.

我们选择 5 ⽉ 12 ⽇是为了纪念南丁格尔, 她创⽴了现代护理学。南丁格尔出⽣在
5 ⽉ 12 ⽇。
①
②
③
④

整 体" ⼈" 的 功能⼤ 于其各 ⽅⾯ 机能的 简单 相加。
护理 多采 ⽤ WHO 对 健康 的定义: " 健康 不仅是 没有疾 病或 虚弱, 它是 ⼀种⽣ 理、 ⼼理、 社会适 应的 完全良 好
状 态。"
帮 助与照 顾始 终是护 理固有 的主 题。
增 进健康 、保 持健康 、恢复 健康 以及临 终关 怀。

3

Unit 2

【原文】
Health and Illness
1. Define health and illness;
2. Describe the characteri stics of health definition of WHO;
3. Differentiate illness and disease;
4. Identify the factors that influence health.

【翻译】
健康与疾病1.定义健康和疾病； 2.描述世卫组织健康定义的特点； 3.不同的疾病和疾病； 4.识别影响健康的事实。

【原文】
Health is a multidimensional concept. Traditionally, health hasbeen defined as a state of presence or absence of disease. Nightinga ledefined health as a state of " being well and using individual's every power the person has to the fullestextent".①
defined by the A mericanN urses Association ②
In 1980, health was
(ANA) in its social policy as" a dynamic state of being in which the develop mental and behavioral potential of an in div idual is realized to the fullestextent possible." ③
The World Health Organization (WHO) takes a more holistic view of health, and defined health in 1947 as" a state of complete physical,
mental, and social well-being,
and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity." ④
This is the mostwidely accepted definition of health. The natures of this definition are: to reflect concern for the individual as a total person functioning physically, psychologically, and socially; to place health in the context of environment; and to equate health with productive and creative living. Generally,
health, which is a positive state, is a wide variation in personal meaning and percep tions of health.⑤ It considers the dimensions of the person, which include the physical, intellectual,
emotional, socio-cultural, spiritual, and environmental aspects composing the whole person.
The definitions of illness are also individualized to each person who experiences an alteration in health. The terms" illness" and" disease" are often used to mean the same process, but they are different. Illness is the personal experience of feeling unhealthy. It is a state in which the person's physical, emotional, i ntellect ual, social,
develop mental, or spiritual function is reduced or impaired compared with previous experience.⑥
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥

【翻译】
健康是一个多维概念。传统上，健康被定义为存在或不存在疾病的状态。南丁格尔将健康定义为"身体健康，最大限'度地利用人所拥有的每一种力量"的状态。①由A meri can护士协会定义② 1980年，健康（ ANA ）在其社会政策中是"一种动态的存在状态，在这种状态下，可以最大限度地实现一个人的发展心理和行为潜力。" ③世界卫生组织（ WHO ）对健康采取了更全面的观点，并在1947年将健康定义为"一种完全的身心和社会福祉的状态，而不仅仅是没有疾病或坚定不移。"④这是最广泛接受的健康定义。这个定义的本质是：反映对个人作为一个在身体、心理和社会方面发挥作用的整体的关注；将健康置于环境的骗局文本中；并将健康与富有成效和创造性的生活等同起来。一般来说，健康是一种积极的状态，是个人平均值和对健康的看法的广泛变化。⑤它考虑人的维度，包括构成整个人的身体、智力、情感、社会文化、精神和环境方面。疾病的定义也针对经历健康变化的每个人进行个性化。术语"疾病"和"疾病"通常用于表示相同的过程，但它们是不同的。生病是感觉不健康的个人经历。与以前的经验相比，这是'一种人的身体、情感、智力、社交、发展心理或精神功能降低或减退的状态。⑥ ① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥

南 丁格尔 将健 康定义 为" 身 体处 于良好 状态 并最⼤ 限度 发挥个 体所有 的能 ⼒" 。
美 国护⼠ 协会 。
(健康 是) ⼀ 个能 尽可能 发挥 个体发 展和⾏ 为潜 能的动 态过 程。
(健康 是) ⼀ 种⽣ 理、⼼ 理和 社会适 应的完 好状 态, ⽽ 不仅 仅是没 有疾 病或虚 弱。
在 个体的 健康 含意和 感受⽅ ⾯的 ⼀个⼤ 范围 的变异 。
⼈ 的⽣理 、情 绪、智 ⼒、社 会、 发展或 精神 活动⽅ ⾯与 以前相 ⽐有所 减退 或削弱 。

5

【原文】
It involves changes in the person's state of being and in social function, and is highly subjective; only the individual can say he or she is ill.
Disease is an in terruption in the continuous process of health,
manifested by abnormalities or disturbance i nt he structure and function of body parts,
systems.① When these abnormalities appear clustered together ②,
organs or the signs and symptoms of a particular disease come into view. Disease can result in a reduction of capacities or a shortening of normal lifespan. Opposite to illness, disease is objective. It may be diagnosed by physicians through specific inspections.
A person may feelill or just not feelwell because of a disease. Whereas a person may also not feelilleven he has specific disease. Therefore, illness may or may not be related to disease.
People's health is influenced by many factors, which are generally divided into 5 groups:
physical, psychological or emotional factors, environmental factors, lifestyle, and social factors.
Physical factors include genetic makeup ③, age, race, developmental level, and sex.
Genetic makeup affects biologic characteristics, innate temperamen t, activity level, and in tellectual potential. The suscep tibility of some specific diseases is related to genetic makeup.
Psychological or emotional factors contain mind-body in teractions④
and self-concept.

【翻译】
它涉及'人的存在状态和社会功能的变化，并且是高度主观的；只有个人才能说他或她生病了。疾病是健康连续过程中的一种恐惧，表现为身体部位、系统的结构和功能的异常或紊乱。①当这些异常出现聚集在一起时② ，器官或特定疾病的体征和症状进入视野。疾病可能导致能力下降或正常寿命缩短。与疾病相反，疾病是客观的。它可能由医生通过特定的检查进行诊断。一个人可能会因为疾病而感到不适或只是感觉不舒服。而一个人即使患有特定疾病也可能不会感到不适。因此，疾病市长可能与疾病无'关。人们的健康受到许多因素的影响，这些因素通常分为5组：生理、心理或情感因素、环境因素、生活方式和社会因素。生理因素包括基因构成③、年龄、种族、发育水平和性别。遗传构成会影响生物学特征、先天气质、活动水平和智力潜力。某些特定疾病的易感性与遗传构成有关。心理或情感因素包括身心互动④和自我概念。

【原文】
In teraction of individual'smind and body and emotional responses of individual may impact health status positively or negatively. The manners and attitudes with which people view and deal with situations can be affected by self -concept ⑤.
The environmental factors are housing, sanitation, climate, food, air, water, soil,
sunshine and so on. Environmental pollutants, which can change normal components of life substances, include fire, smoking, waste water, exhaustgas, residue of industry and human life, radiation such as X-ray, elect romagnetic wave and microwave, nitrogen oxides from vehicles,
" greenhouse effect" caused by carbon dioxide, pesticides and chemicals used by farmers and so on.
Lifestyle involves aspects of persons' behavior and surround ings that they control.⑥

【翻译】
个人身心'和情绪反应的相互作用可能会对健康状况产生积极或消极的影响。人们看待和处理情况的方式和态度会受到自我概念⑤的影响。环境因素包括住房、卫生、气候、食物、空气、水、土壤、阳光等。环境污染物可以改变生命物质的正常成分，包括火灾、吸烟、废水、废气、工业和人类生活的残留物、X射线、电磁波和微波等辐射、车辆产生的氮氧化物、二氧化碳引起的"温室效应"、农民使用的农药和化学品以及很快。生活方式涉及人们'行为的各个方面，以及他们所控制的环境。⑥

It

【原文】
may affect health positively or negatively. Lifestyle with positive effects on health is a healthy lifestyle, such as regular exercise, alcohol and smoking avoidance, immunization update,
regular dental checkups and so on. Lifestyles with potentially negative effects on health are often defined as risk factors, such as smoking, frequently staying up all night or lying in,
etc.
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥

【翻译】
可能会对健康产生积极或消极的影响。对健康有积极影响的生活方式是一种健康的生活方式，如定期锻炼、避免饮酒和吸烟、免疫接种更新、定期牙科检查等。对健康有潜在负面影响的生活方式通常被定义为风险因素，例如吸烟、经常熬夜或躺在床上等。① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥

疾 病是健 康连 续过程 的中断, 通 过机体 各部 分、器 官或 系统的 异常或 紊乱 表现出 来。
集 中出现 。
遗 传构成 。
身 ⼼的交 互作 ⽤。
⾃ 我概念 。
⽣ 活⽅式 涉及 ⼈的⾏ 为和可 控制 的环境 等⽅ ⾯。

6

Unit 2

【原文】
Health and Illness There are many social factors influencing individual's health, such as stable marriage or in timate family relationship, economic level, occupational situations and culture, healthcare system, social violence and traffic acciden t, people's cultural background, etc. These factors may be risk factors for illness, or healthy factors that can promote health.

【翻译】
健康和疾病影响个人健康的社会因素很多，如稳定'的婚姻或亲密的家庭关系、经济水平、职业状况和文化、卫生保健系统、社会暴力和交通事故、'人们的文化背景等。这些因素可能是疾病的风险因素，也可能是促进健康的健康因素。

Daily Language
1. You lookpale. What's wrong with you?
你脸⾊苍⽩, 怎么了?
2. I didn't sleep a winklast night.
我昨晚⼀夜没睡。
3. Do you have anything in your mind? You look so concerned!
你在想什么? 你看起来好像有⼼事。
4. I'm worried about my husband. His snoring is getting worse and worse.
我为我的丈夫担⼼。他打鼾越来越严重了。
5. Maybe you need to consult a doctor about it.
也许这个问题你需要看医⽣。
6. I am ill with a common cold.
我⽣病感冒了。
7. Don't worry. I will make an arrangement for you to seet he doctor.
别担⼼, 我会帮你预约医⽣的。
8. I don'tfeelwell today. I think I am ill.
我今天觉得不舒服, 我想我是⽣病了。
9. He hasbeen diagnosed to have pneumonia.
他被诊断患了肺炎。

Vocabulary
1. multidimensional [蔠m蓊l t i di蔠men蓌
蓈n蓈l, - da蔠
i m-] adj. 多⾯的, 多维的
2. holistic [h蓈u蔠l ist i k] adj. 整体的, 全盘的
3. infirmity [i n蔠f蓈
蓎m it i] n. 虚弱, 衰弱, 缺点
4. variation [v e蓈r蔠
i e蓌
i (蓈) n] n. 变更, 变化, 变异, 变种
5. in tellectual [i nt 蔠
i lektj u蓈l] adj. 智⼒的, 有智⼒的

n. 知识分⼦

6. spiritual [蔠sp i r i 蓌
t u蓈l] adj. 精神上的
7. abnormality [蔠 b n蓋
蓎
蔠m l蓈t i] n. 变态; 畸形, 异常性
8. disturbance [d 蔠
i st蓈
蓎b蓈ns] n. 骚动, 动乱, 打扰, ⼲扰, 骚乱, 搅
9. inspection [i n蔠spek蓌(蓈) n] n. 检查, 视察; 望诊
7
