Day 18 | Unit 35-36

Unit 35

【原文】
Breast-Fee ding
1. S tate the nutritional traits of human milk;
2. Interpre t the advantages of breast-feeding;
3. Instruct mo ther and family how to breast-feed.
H uman milk is t he most appropriate natural nut rien t for the infan t. Breast- feed ing ①

【翻译】
哺乳丁一声。陈述母乳的营养特性；2.解读母乳喂养的优势；3.指导母亲和家人如何母乳喂养。母乳是婴儿最合适的天然营养素。母乳喂养

is

【原文】
one of t he methods of feeding infants. The first breast-feeding should be undertaken as soon as possible after delivery. The lactation of a healt hymot her usually meetst he infant's needs in t he first 6 mont hs of age.
Components of human milk There are hundreds of componen ts in human milk. However, human milk does not have a constant componen t,
and sign if ican t changes occur d uring the course of lacta tion,
diurnally and during each feed.②
According to the course of lactation, World Healt h Organization divides human milk into 4 types, which are colostr um ③
transitiona l milk ④
late milk ⑥
(5～10 days of postnatal), m at ure milk ⑤
(4 days of post natal),
(11 day～9 months), and
(after 10 mont hs).

【翻译】
喂养婴儿的方法之一。分娩后应尽快进行第一次母乳喂养。健康母亲的乳汁通常会流入婴儿体内'前6个月的需求。母乳的成分母乳中有数百种成分。然而，母乳没有恒定的成分，如果在哺乳过程中、日间和每次喂食时发生变化，请签字。②根据泌乳过程，世界卫生组织将人乳分为4种类型，即初乳③过渡乳④晚乳⑥(出生后5~10天)、成熟乳⑤(出生后4天)、11天~9个月、10个月后。

【原文】
Protein: The figure of t he protein content in human milk is 12 g/ L compared to 35 g/ L in cow's milk. The two main classes of protein are whey and casein. Hum an milk is whey predominant (about 60% of total protein). In hum an whey, α -lactalbu min is the dominant p rotein followed by lactoferrin.⑦ The ratio of casein to lactalbumin in human milk is 4∶ 6,
different from that in cow's milk (4∶ 1). Human milk casein yields a softer,
curd than cow's milk at lowpH,
more f locculen tw hich is more help ful for in f an t to digest.⑧

【翻译】
蛋白质:母乳中的蛋白质含量是12克/升，而奶牛是35克/升'的牛奶。两种主要的蛋白质是乳清和酪蛋白。人乳以乳清为主(约占总蛋白质的60%)。在人类乳清中，α-乳清蛋白是主要的蛋白质，其次是乳铁蛋白。⑦人乳中酪蛋白和乳清蛋白的比例为4∶ 6，不同于牛奶's牛奶(4∶ 1)。人乳酪蛋白比牛奶产生更软的凝乳'ph值越低，牛奶中的絮状物越多，越有利于婴儿消化。⑧

The

【原文】
essen tial amino acid content is high in human milk. During early lactation milk protein is much higher than t hat in mature milk.
Fat: The fat content of milk varies from different mothers and during the course of
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥
⑦
⑧

【翻译】
人乳中必需氨基酸含量很高。泌乳早期的乳蛋白比成熟乳中的高得多。脂肪:不同的母亲和在① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥ ⑦ ⑧的过程中，乳汁的脂肪含量不同

⺟ 乳喂养 。
⺟ 乳的成 分并 不是不 变的, 它随 着乳汁 分泌 过程、 昼夜 交替和 每⼀次 喂哺 ⽽变化 。
初 乳。
过 渡乳。
成 熟乳。
晚 乳。
在 ⼈乳清 中, 以α -乳 清蛋 ⽩含量 ⾼, 其次为 乳铁蛋 ⽩。
在 酸性环 境下, ⼈乳 中酪蛋 ⽩凝 块较⽜ 乳中 的软, 多为 絮状, 更利于 婴⼉ 消化。

142

【原文】
Unit 35 Breast-Feeding lactation. The fat concent ration rises markedly from around 21 g/ L to 41 g/ L during a feed.
H uman milk has a higher proportion of unsaturatedf atty aci ds① and a greater concent ration of the essen tial f atty acids②
than cow's milk. Long-cha in f atty acids③ in human milk are esterified to glycerol, which improves their absorption. The property of human milk fat is markedly influenced by diet. Vegetarians, for instance, consume more long-chain fatty acids than t hose on a mixed diet.
Carbohydrate: Higher concent ration of lactose is present in human milk (70 g/ L) than in cow's milk (47 g/ L). Lactose enhances calcium absorption from the gut, promotes the grow th of lactobacilli,
and helps to create a f avorable gutflora that protects agai nst gastroen teritis.④
Minerals: All major minerals are presen t in lower concent rations in human milk than in cow's milk, w hich reduces infant'srenal solu teload ⑤. The appropriate phosphate/ calcium ratio in human milk is beneficial to absorption. The absorption rate of iron in human milk is about 50%, although t he concent ration is very low. There is good bioavailability of zinc from human milk.
Vitamins: There are plen ty of vitamin A, C, D and E in human milk, especially in colostrum. However, low vitamin K concent ration (15 mg/ L) in human milk may contribute to vitamin K deficiency of t he infant exclusively breast- fed ⑥.
Immune componen ts: There are many immune componen ts in human milk. T he concentration of secretory IgA is very high i nhum an milk,
especially i n colostr ums.⑦
Secretory IgA is comparatively resistant to lowpH and proteoly tic enzymes, and protects infan t from infection. There are other immune componen ts present in human milk such as lactoferrin, lysozyme, and other an timicrobial factors.
Enzymes: Several kinds of enzymes are presen t in hum an milk such as lipase, amylase,
and several proteases.
Advantages of breast-feeding Advantages of breast-feeding are as follows:
Feeding infant easily: Breast milk is always readily available at t he proper temperature and needs no time for preparation. It is also economical and healthy.
Reducing infant morbidity and mortalit y:

【翻译】
母乳喂养哺乳。在喂食过程中，脂肪浓度从大约21克/升显著上升到41克/升。母乳中不饱和脂肪酸的比例比牛奶高，必需脂肪酸的浓度也比牛奶高'的牛奶。人乳中的长链脂肪酸③酯化为甘油，提高了其吸收。饮食对人乳脂肪的性质有显著影响。例如，素食者比那些混合饮食的人消耗更多的长链脂肪酸。碳水化合物:母乳中的乳糖浓度(70克/升)高于牛奶'牛奶(47克/升)。乳糖增强肠道对钙的吸收，促进乳酸杆菌的生长，并有助于建立一个有利的肠道菌群，以防止胃肠道炎症。④矿物质:母乳中所有主要矿物质的浓度都低于牛奶'美国牛奶，减少婴儿's肾溶质负荷⑤。人乳中适当的磷酸盐/钙比例有利于吸收。人乳中铁的吸收率在50%左右，虽然浓度很低。母乳中的锌具有良好的生物利用率。维生素:人乳中含有丰富的维生素A、C、维生素d，尤其是初乳中。然而，母乳中维生素Kc含量低(15毫克/升)可能是纯母乳喂养婴儿维生素k缺乏的原因之一。免疫成分:人乳中有很多免疫成分。分泌型IgA在人乳中的浓度非常高，尤其是在结肠甲状腺肿中。⑦分泌型IgA对低ph值和蛋白酶有较强的抵抗力，保护婴儿免受感染。母乳中还存在其他免疫成分，如乳铁蛋白、溶菌酶和其他抗菌因子。酶:母乳中存在几种酶，如脂肪酶、淀粉酶和几种蛋白酶。母乳喂养的优势母乳喂养区的优势如下:喂养婴儿容易:母乳在适当的温度下总是容易获得，不需要时间准备。也是经济又健康。降低婴儿发病率和死亡率:

【原文】
contaminating bacteria,

【翻译】
包含细菌，

Hum an milk is

【原文】
f resh and w hich reduces the chances of gastroin testi nald isorders.⑧
free of Breast-
fed infants have less vulnerability for diarrhea because of the appropriate nut ritive con tents and
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥
⑦
⑧

【翻译】
新鲜，并减少肠胃不适的机会。⑧非母乳喂养的婴儿因其适当的营养成分和① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥ ⑦ ⑧不易患腹泻

不 饱和脂 肪酸 。
必 需脂肪 酸。
⻓ 链脂肪 酸。
乳 糖可增 加肠 道钙的 吸收, 促进 乳酸杆 菌的 ⽣⻓, 并有 助于建 ⽴肠道 正常 菌群, 防⽌ 胃肠炎 。
肾 脏的溶 质负 荷。
纯 ⺟乳喂 养。
⺟ 乳尤其 是初 乳中分 泌型 IgA 浓度⾮ 常⾼。
⺟ 乳新鲜, 未 受细菌 污染, 可减 少胃肠 道疾 病。

143

【原文】
proportions and much more immune factors in breast milk. Allergy and in tolerance to cow's milk may create significant dist urbances such as diarrhea, in testinal bleeding, atopiceczema.
Low i ncidence of pneu m onia as well as certain a llergic and chronic diseases i n the later life has been reported in breast- fed i nfants.①
Meeting infant's nutritional needs: Plen ty of nut rien ts and t heir appropriate ratios in breast milk are helpful for infan t to digest and absorb.
Promoting mot her-infan t attachment: Successful breast-feeding is a satisfying experience for both mot her and infant. By feeding her baby, the mother may gain both a feeling of being essen tial and a sense of accomplishmen t. Moreover, t he infant has a close and comfortable relationship with t he mother. Breast-feeding offers increased opportunit y for close contact between t he mot her and the infan t.
Physical benefits for the mot her: Breast-feeding may promote t he resumption of u terus,
inhibit ovulation, and reduce morbidity of breast cancer and ovary cancer.

【翻译】
比例和更多的免疫因子。对牛过敏和不耐受'母乳可能会引起严重的不适，如腹泻、肠道出血、特应性湿疹。据报道，母乳喂养的婴儿在晚年患肺炎以及某些过敏症和慢性病的几率较低。①会见婴儿'的营养需求:母乳中丰富的坚果及其适当的比例有助于婴儿的消化和吸收。促进母婴关系:成功的母乳喂养对母亲和婴儿来说都是令人满意的经历。通过喂养她的婴儿，母亲可能会获得一种重要的感觉和成就感。此外，婴儿与母亲有着亲密舒适的关系。母乳喂养增加了母亲和婴儿之间亲密接触的机会。对母亲身体的好处:母乳喂养可以促进子宫恢复，抑制排卵，降低乳腺癌和卵巢癌的发病率。

Dialogue
1. How often should I feed my baby?
我应该间隔多⻓时间给孩⼦喂⼀次奶?
2. There is no exact time. We encourage feeding the baby once he wakes up or looks hungry.
没有确定的时间规定。我们⿎励⼀旦孩⼦醒了或看起来饿了的时候就喂奶。
3. Place a low stool under your foot to raise your knee. Then, hold the baby comfor tably with your arm and let the baby face the breast. Uset he other hand to support the breast.
在你的脚下放⼀张矮凳⼦使膝盖抬⾼。然后⽤ 你的胳 膊把孩 ⼦抱 舒服, 让 孩⼦ 的
脸正对乳房, ⽤另⼀只⼿托着乳房。
4. After feeding t he baby, puthimupright, have himlean against your shoulder and burp him.
哺乳完毕, 将婴⼉竖抱, 让他伏在你的肩上, 轻轻拍拍他的背部直到他打嗝。

Vocabulary
1. lactation [l k蔠t e蓌
i 蓈n] n. 泌乳, 泌乳期, 哺乳 (期), 授乳 (期)
2. diurnal [da蔠
i蓈
蓎n l] adj. 每⽇的, ⼀⽇间的, ⽩天的, 昼间的
diurnally adv.
①

据 报道, ⺟乳 喂养的 婴⼉⽇ 后肺 炎、过 敏性 疾病和 慢性 病的发 ⽣率低 。

144

Unit 36

【原文】
Contraception
1. List the common method s of contracep tion;
2. List the advantages and dis advantages of each of the methods of contraception.

【翻译】
概念1。列出常用的避孕方法；2.列出每种避孕方法的优缺点。

【原文】
There are a number of different methods of con tracep tion. Each has itsown advantages and disadvan tages. A ll forms of con tracep tion work by p reven ting t he fertilization of a woman'segg by a m an's sperm ①, which can be achieved in various ways.
The male condom is really just a rubber tube. I t covers penis and stops sperm from going in to vagina. An advantage of using male condom is t hat it helps to protect against pregnancy as well as STDs such as AIDS.
Spermicides are chemical agen ts that stop sperm from t raveling up into the cervix.
Spermicide comes in dif feren t for ms i nclu ding the sponge, vagi nal pessaries, and foam.②
Spermicides are not very effective against pregnancy when used alone, but they can be used effectively with t he male condom. The male condom and spermicides, when used together, is a good combination for providing effective protection against both pregnancy and STDs.
Contraceptive pills contain chemicals called hormones. One type of pill con tains two hormones: oestrogen and progestogen. T he pill stops the release of an egg every monthbut doesn't stop periods.③ The ot her type of pill con tains only progestogen. It works by altering the m ucous li ning of the vagi na to make it thicker.④
The sperm cannot then gett hrough,
and as a result, the girl can'tget pregnant. Usually the girl has to take one pill every day for about t hree weeks every mont h. It is very impor tant for the girl not to forget to take t he pills.
The disadvan tage of t he pill is t hat it does not provide any protection against STDs. For very good protection against both pregnancy and STDs, t he contraceptive pills should be used together with t he male condom.
Depo-Provera ⑤ is t he most popular form of in ject able hormonal contracep tion ⑥,

【翻译】
有许多不同的追踪方法。各有利弊。所有形式的避孕都是通过阻止女性受精来实现的'一个男人的鸡蛋's精子①，可以通过各种方式实现。男用避孕套实际上只是一个橡胶管。它覆盖阴茎，阻止精子进入阴道。使用男用避孕套的一个优点是它有助于防止怀孕和性病，如艾滋病。杀精剂是一种阻止精子进入子宫颈的化学物质。杀精剂有不同的形式，包括海绵、阴道栓和泡沫。②杀精剂在单独使用时对怀孕不是很有效，但它们可以与男用避孕套一起使用。男用避孕套和杀精剂一起使用时，是有效防止怀孕和性传播疾病的良好组合。避孕药含有被称为激素的化学物质。一种药丸含有两种激素:雌激素和孕激素。这种药丸每月停止一个卵子的释放，但不会't停止周期。③另一种避孕药只含孕激素。它的工作原理是改变阴道的粘膜层，使其变厚。④精子无法通过，结果女孩可以通过'怀孕了。通常女孩必须每天服用一粒药丸，每个月服用大约三周。对这个女孩来说，不要忘记吃药是非常重要的。这种药丸的缺点是它对性病没有任何保护作用。为了很好地防止怀孕和性传播疾病，避孕药应该和男用避孕套一起使用。狄波-普罗维拉⑤是最受欢迎的注射荷尔蒙避孕法⑥，

w hich

【原文】
involves t he girl having an injection once every twelve weeks. The injection contains the
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥

【翻译】
包括女孩每12周注射一次。注射液含有① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥

所 有的避 孕⽅ 法都是 通过阻 ⽌卵 细胞受 孕⽽ 发挥作 ⽤的 。
杀 精剂有 海绵 状、阴 道栓剂 和泡 沫状等 不同 的形状 。
⼝ 服避孕 药能 阻⽌卵 细胞的 释放, 但却 不会 ⼲扰正 常的 ⽉经。
它 通过使 阴道 的黏膜 内壁变 厚⽽ 起作⽤ 。
甲 孕酮。
激 素类的 注射 型避孕 药。

146

【原文】
Unit 36 Contraception hormone progestogen. I t works in t he same way as t he progestogen only pill buthas the advantage that you do not have to remember to take a pill every day. However, it has the same disadvantage as t he hormonal pill, in t hat it provides no protection against STDs.
Norplant

【翻译】
避孕激素孕激素。它的工作方式与单孕激素药丸相同，但它的优点是你不必记住每天服用一粒药丸。然而，它和激素药丸有同样的缺点，因为它不能预防性病。正常植物

①

【原文】
(an implant) is a prescription birth con trol method ②
t hat provides prolonged protection against pregnancy. S i xmatch-sized capsules are inserted under the skin of t he upper arm i n a f an- like pattern, using a local anest hetic.③
The capsules release a constan t dose of a hormone, progestin, thereby protecting against pregnancy. It is a very effective cont raceptive method. Once in place the cont raceptive benefits last for up to five years. A disadvan tage of the implant is that it provides no protection against STDs.
Diaphragm/ Cervical Cap covers open ing to u terus and con tains con tracep tive crea m or jelly w hich destroys sperm.④
To make it work well, exam is needed to measure correct size.

【翻译】
(植入)是一种避孕方法，它提供了长期的避孕保护。使用局部麻醉剂，六个匹配大小的胶囊以扇形模式插入上臂皮下。③胶囊释放恒定剂量的激素——黄体酮，从而防止怀孕。这是一种非常有效的避孕方法。一旦到位，避孕福利可持续长达五年。这种植入物的一个缺点是它不能预防性病。子宫帽/宫颈帽覆盖向子宫开口，并含有破坏精子的微量软膏或凝胶。④为使其正常工作，需要进行测试以测量正确的尺寸。

【原文】
Cervical cap or diaphragm with cream or jelly should be inserted in to vagina before sexual in tercourse and left in place at least 6 hours after in tercourse, but not longer than 24 hours.
Diaphragm or cervical cap can be reused many times if properly cared for.
Natural Fa mily Planning (periodic abstinence) is an fertility aw areness method.⑤
Women learn to recognize their fertile time (when they can get pregnan t) and infertile time
(when they can'tget pregnant) by checking temperat ure and cervical mucus daily and keeping a record of t heir periods. Nat ural Family Planning users do not have in tercourse during fertile time if pregnancy is not desired. Special classes are needed to learn t he method. I t is a method allowed by most religious groups. However, it is difficult for women with irregular cycles.
Sterilization is a permanent method. Men have vasectomy, an operation which separates t he tubes bet ween the testes and penis so they can still ejaculate t hough there is no sperm in t heir semen. Women have tubal ligation, an operation w hich separates and blocks the tubes between t he ovaries and uterus so that sperm cannot reach eggs. Sterilization requires surgery and is permanent. A disadvantage is that it is rarely reversible.
E mergency contraception ⑥ can be used when people have hadunp rotected sex ⑦

【翻译】
应在性交前将带有乳膏或凝胶的宫颈帽或子宫帽插入阴道，并在性交后至少6小时留在原位，但不得超过24小时。如果护理得当，子宫帽或宫颈帽可以重复使用多次。自然计划生育(定期禁欲)是一种生育意识方法。⑤女性学会识别自己的生育时间(何时可以怀孕)和不孕时间(何时可以怀孕'通过每天检查体温和宫颈粘液并记录她们的月经。如果不想怀孕，自然计划生育使用者不会在生育期进行性交。学习这种方法需要特别的课程。这是大多数宗教团体允许的方法。但是对于周期不规律的女性来说就很难了。绝育是一种永久的方法。男性接受输精管切除术，这是一种分离睾丸和阴茎之间管道的手术，因此即使精液中没有精子，他们仍然可以射精。女性接受输卵管结扎手术，这种手术会分离并堵塞卵巢和子宫之间的管道，使精子无法到达卵子。绝育需要手术，而且是永久性的。缺点是它很少是可逆的。当人们有过无保护的性行为时，可以使用紧急避孕措施

or the

【原文】
birt hcon trol method they are using fails. There are basically two types of emergency con traception available: the E mergency Contraceptive Pill (ECP) ⑧
In trau teri ne Device (I UD) ⑨
method and the method. The ECP method uses a high dose of combined oral con traceptives (OCs) to preven t conception. I t is effective if used within 72 hours after unprotected sex. The IUD method involves t he insertion of an I UD into t he u terus by the
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥
⑦
⑧
⑨

【翻译】
他们使用的节育方法失败了。基本上有两种紧急避孕方法:紧急避孕药(ECP) ⑧避孕器(UD) ⑨避孕法和避孕方法。ECP的方法使用高剂量的复合口服避孕药(OCs)来避孕。无保护性交后72小时内使用有效。宫内节育器方法包括通过① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥ ⑦ ⑧ ⑨将UD插入子宫

⽪ 下埋植 。
⼀ 种需要 医⽣ 开具处 ⽅的避 孕⽅ 法。
通 过局麻 ⽅法 把 6 ⽚ ⽕柴⼤ ⼩的胶 囊像 扇形⼀ 样埋 植在上 臂的 ⽪肤下 。
⼦ 宫帽盖 住⼦ 宫的⼊ ⼝, 并 含有 能杀灭 精⼦ 的乳脂 或胶 状物。
安 全期避 孕法 是⼀种 回避受 孕时 间的避 孕⽅ 法。
紧 急避孕 法。
没 有保护 的性 ⾏为。
紧 急⼝服 避孕 药, 缩 写为 ECP。
⼦ 宫内避 孕器, 缩写 为 IUD 。

147

【原文】
doctor. The I UDcreates an unfriendly environment for egg and sperm. The I UD must be inserted within 7 days of unprotected sex.

【翻译】
医生。UD为卵子和精子创造了一个不友好的环境。UD必须在无保护性交后7天内植入。

【原文】
Vocabulary
1. con tracep tion [蔠k蓋n t r蓈
蔠sep蓌
蓈n] n. 避孕, 避孕法
con tracep tive [k蓋n t r蓈
蔠sep t i v] adj. 避孕的
con tracep tive pill

【翻译】
词汇1。跟踪[蔠k蓋正常贸易关系(Normal Trade Relations)蓈 蔠九月蓌 蓈n] n。避孕,避孕法有追溯力的蓋正常贸易关系(Normal Trade Relations)蓈 蔠九月四日。避孕的避孕丸

⼝服避孕药

2. fer tilization [蔠f蓈
蓎t i l ai蔠zei蓌
蓈n] n. 授精
3. egg [e蓐] n. 卵细胞
4. sperm [sp蓈
蓎m] n. 精液, 精⼦
5. condom [蔠k蓋n d蓈m] n. 避孕套
6. penis [蔠p蓎
i n is] n. 阴茎
7. vagina [v蓈
蔠d蓏ai n蓈] n. [动] 鞘, [解] 阴道
8. spermicide [蔠sp蓈
蓎m 蔠
i said] n. 杀精⼦剂
9. cervix [蔠s蓈
蓎v i ks] n. [解] 颈部, ⼦宫颈
10. pessary [蔠pes蓈r i] (pl. pessaries) n. ⼦宫套, 阴道栓剂
11. hormone [蔠h蓋
蓎m蓈u n] n. 荷尔蒙, 激素
12. oestrogen [蔠蓎
i st r蓈d蓏蓈n] n. 雌激素
13. progestogen [p r蓈u蔠磃es 蓈
t 磃蓈n] n. 孕激素
14. capsule [蔠k psj u蓎l] n. 胶囊
15. anest hetic [蔠 n is蔠
θ etik] n. 麻醉剂, 麻药

adj. 麻醉的

16. diaphragm [蔠da 蓈
i frm] n. 横膈膜, ⼦宫帽避孕套
17. cream [k r蓎
i m] n. 乳脂状
18. jelly [蔠d蓏e l i] n. 胶状物
19. in tercourse [蔠i n 蓈
t (蓎) k蓋
蓎s] n. 性交
20. fertility [f蓈
蓎
蔠t i l i t i] n. 受精能⼒, ⽣育⼒
fertile [蔠f蓈
蓎t ail; 蔠蓈
f 蓎t i l] adj. 有繁殖⼒的, 能⽣育的
infertile adj. 不育的
21. mucus [蔠m j u蓎k蓈s] n. 黏液, 胶
22. sterilization [ster i l a蔠
i zei蓌
蓈n] n. 杀菌, 绝育
23. vasectomy [v 蔠sek t蓈m i] n. 输精管切除术
24. testis [蔠test is] (pl. testes) n. 睾丸
25. ejaculate [蔠
i 磃 kjule it] vi. 射出, 射精 n. ⼀次射出的精液
26. semen [蔠si蓎men] n. 精液, 精⼦
27. ligation [l a蔠
i 蓐e 蓌
i 蓈n] n. 结扎
tubal ligation

输卵管结扎术
148
