Day 14 | Unit 27-28

Unit 27

【原文】
Constipation
1. Interpret the term: Constipation;
2. Identify the factors that lead to constipation;
3. State the complic ations of the constipation;
4. State the treatment of constipation.

【翻译】
便秘1.解读术语：便秘； 2.识别导致便秘的事实； 3.阐述便秘的并发症； 4.阐述便秘的治疗。

【原文】
Consti pation is passage of small quantity of hard,
dry stool.①
Other symptoms of constipation include feeling bloated, uncomfortable, and sluggish. People who are constipated may find it difficult and painful to have a bowel movement. Common causes of constipation are as the following:
Not enough fiber in the diet. The most common cause of constipation is that people eattoomuchlow fiber food, such as cheese, eggs, and meats. People who eatlots of high- fiber f oods② such as vegetables, fruits, and whole grain are less likely to become constipated.
Fiber, both soluble and insoluble, is the part of fruits, vegetables, and grainsthat the body cannot digest. Insoluble fiber passes through the intestines almost unchanged. The bulk and softtexture of fiber help prevent hard, dry stools.
Not enough liquids. Liquid like water and juice adds fluid to the colon and bulk to stools,
making bowel movements softer and easier to pass. People with constipation must drink enough of these liquids eachday. Liquids that contain caffeine, likecoffee and coladrinks,
and alcohol have a dehydrati ngeffect ③. Drink as less as possible if possible.
Lack of exercise can result in constipation, although doctors do not know the reason precisely. For example, constipation often takes place after an acciden t or during an illness when one must stay in bed and cannot exercise.
Medications such as pain medications (especially narcotics), antacids that contain aluminum and calcium, blood pressure medications (calcium channel blockers), an tiparkinson drugs, antispasmodics, an tidepressants, iron supplements, diuretics, and anticonvulsants may lead to constipation.

【翻译】
Consti pa tion是少量硬的、干燥的粪便的通道。①便秘的其他症状包括感觉臃肿、不舒服和迟钝。便秘的人可能会发现排便困难且痛苦。便秘的常见原因如下：饮食中纤维不足。便秘最常见的原因是人们吃太多低纤维食物，如奶酪、鸡蛋和肉类。吃大量高纤维食物的人② ，如蔬菜、水果和全谷物，便秘的可能性较小。纤维既可溶又不可溶，是水果、蔬菜和谷物中身体无法消化的部分。不溶性纤维几乎不变地穿过肠道。纤维的松软质地有助于防止硬而干燥的粪便。液体不足。像水和果汁这样的液体会为结肠增加液体，为大便增加大量液体，使排便更柔软，更容易通过。便秘患者必须每天摄入足够的这些液体。含有咖啡因的液体，如咖啡和可乐饮料，以及酒精具有脱水作用③。如果可能的话，尽量少喝。缺乏运动会导致便秘，尽管医生并不确切知道原因。例如，便秘通常发生在事故后或疾病期间，患者必须卧床不能运动。药物，如止痛药（特别是麻醉药）、含有铝和钙的抗酸剂、血压药物（钙通道阻滞剂）、提帕金森药物、解痉药、抗抑郁药、铁补充剂、利尿剂和抗惊厥药可能导致便秘。

①
②
③

便 秘就是 排除 的粪便 量少且 坚硬 ⼲燥。
富 含纤维 的⻝ 物。
脱 ⽔作⽤ 。

108

【原文】
Unit 27 Constipation Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS).①
People with Irritable Bowel Syndrome, also known as spastic colon, havespasms in the colon that influence bowel movements.
Constipation and diarrhea are its common symptoms, usually alternating. Abdominal cramping, gassiness, and bloating are other common complaints.
Changes in life or routine. During pregnancy,
women may be constipated because of hormonal changes or because the heavyuter us compresses the intestine.②
Aging may also affect bowel regularity because a slower metabolism results in less intestinal movement and muscle tone. In addition, people are prone to be constipated when traveling because their normal diet and daily routines are changed.
Abuse of laxatives.③ Rumors about constipation may lead to a serious abuse of laxatives.
It is popular among people who are preoccupied with having a daily bowel movement.
Laxatives usually are not necessary and can be habit-forming. The colon begins to count on laxatives to bring on bowel movements. Ultimately, laxatives can damage nerve cells in the colon and disturbt he colon's natural ability to contract. For the same reason, regular use of enemas can alsolead to a loss of normal bowel function.
Ignoring the urge to have a bowel movement.④
People who ignore the urge to have a bowel movement may finally feel no urge, which can lead to constipation. Some people delay having a bowel movement because they do not want to usetoilets in comfort station. Others ignore the urge because of emotional stress or because they are toobusy. Children may postpone having a bowel movement because they do not want to be interrupted when they are playing.
Specific diseases. Neurological disorders, metabolic or endocrine disorders, and systemic conditions that affect organ systems are usually causes of the constipation.
Problems with the colon and rectum. Intestinal obstruction, scar tissue (adhesions),
tumors, colorectal strict ure,
Hirschsprung'sd isease⑤, or cancer can compress, squash, or narrowt he intestine and rectum, therefore, resulting in constipation.
Consti pation can result i ncom plications including hemorrhoi ds caused by exerting to have a bowel movement or anal fissures caused when hard stool hurts the sphincter muscle.⑥
Treatment for he morrhoids may include warm tubbaths, ice packs, and application of a special cream to the affected area. Treatment for analfissu re⑦
may include stretching the sphincter muscle or surgical removal of tissue or skin in the affected area. Sometimes straining causes a small amount of intestinal lining to push out from the anal opening.⑧

【翻译】
Unit 27便秘肠易激综合征（ IBS ）。①肠易激综合征患者，也称为痉挛性结肠，结肠痉挛会影响肠道运动。便秘和腹泻是其常见症状，通常交替出现。腹部痉挛、气喘和腹胀是其他常见的抱怨。生活或日常生活的变化。在怀孕期间，女性可能因为荷尔蒙的变化或因为重物压迫肠道而便秘。②衰老也可能影响肠道规律，因为新陈代谢缓慢会导致肠道运动和肌肉张力减弱。此外，人们在旅行时容易便秘，因为他们的正常饮食和日常生活发生了变化。滥用泻药。③关于便秘的谣言可能导致严重滥用泻药。它在忙于日常排便的人群中很受欢迎。泻药通常不是必需的，可能会养成习惯。结肠开始依靠泻药来进行排便。最终，泻药会损害结肠中的神经细胞，扰乱'结肠的自然收缩能力。出于同样的原因，定期使用灌肠也会导致正常肠道功能的丧失。忽略排便的冲动。④忽视排便冲动的人，最终可能感觉不到冲动，从而导致便秘。有些人会推迟排便，因为他们不想在舒适站使用厕所。其他人会因为情绪压力或太忙而忽视这种冲动。孩子们可能会推迟排便，因为他们不想在玩耍时被打断。特定疾病。影响器官系统的神经系统疾病、代谢或内分泌疾病以及全身性疾病通常是便秘的原因。结肠和直肠问题。肠梗阻、瘢痕组织（粘连）、肿瘤、结肠直肠'狭窄、Hirschsprung病⑤或癌症可压迫、挤压或缩小肠和直肠，从而导致便秘。腹泻可能导致并发症，包括痔疮，痔疮是由于排便困难引起的，肛门裂痕是由于大便硬而导致的。⑥痔疮的治疗可能包括温水浴缸、冰袋以及在患处涂抹特殊乳膏。肛门裂缝的治疗可能包括拉伸括约肌或手术切除受影响区域的组织或皮肤。有时，捆扎会导致肛门开口向外推出一小块内衬中的测试材料。⑧

This

【原文】
condition, also called rectal prolapse, may lead to secretion of mucus from the anus.
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥
⑦
⑧

【翻译】
病症，也称为直肠脱垂，可能导致肛门分泌粘液。① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥ ⑦ ⑧

肠 激惹综 合症, 缩写 为 IBS 。
妇 ⼥怀孕 期间, 由于 激素⽔ 平改 变或由 于增 ⼤的⼦ 宫压 迫肠道 可能导 致便 秘。
滥 ⽤泻药 。
忽略排 便冲动。
先 天性巨 结肠 。
便 秘会导 致并 发症, 包括⽤ ⼒⼤ 便引起 的痔 疮和坚 硬粪 便损伤 肛⻔括 约肌 引起的 肛裂 。
肛 裂。
有 时⽤⼒ ⼤便 会导致 ⼀部分 直肠 内壁从 肛⻔ ⼝脱出 。

109

【原文】
Constipation may also result in hard stool which cramst he intestine and rectum so tightlyt hat the normal pushing movement of the colon is not enough to expelt he stool. This condition,
called fecal impaction, occurs most commonly in children and the elderly. Impaction stool can be made softer with mineraloil taken by mouth and by an enema. After softening the impaction, the doctor may break up part of the hardened stool and insert one or two fingers in to the anus to remove them.
Although consti pation treatment depends on the cause,
severity, and duration,

【翻译】
便秘也可能导致粪便硬化，使肠道和直肠挤得太紧，以至于结肠的正常推动运动不足以排出粪便。这种情况称为粪便撞击，最常见于儿童和老年人。用口服矿物油和灌肠可以使冲击粪便更柔软。软化撞击后，医生可能会打破部分硬化粪便，并将一两根手指插入肛门以将其取出。虽然便秘治疗取决于病因、严重程度和持续时间，

in

【原文】
most cases, dietary and lifestyle changes will help relieve symptoms of consti pation and help prevent it.①
The followings are the common measures to take when treating constipation.

【翻译】
大多数情况下，改变饮食和生活方式将有助于缓解便秘症状并预防便秘。①以下是治疗便秘时应采取的常见措施。

【原文】
Diet with enough fiber (20 to 35 gramseachday) helps formsoft, bulky stool. People inclining to constipation need to limit foods that have little or no fiber, such as ice cream,
cheese, meat, and processed foods.
Certain lifestyle changes can help treat and prevent constipation, including drinking enough water and other liquid such as fruit and vegetable juice, taking part in daily exercise,
and reserving adequate time to stimulate a bowel movement. In addition, the urge to have a bowel movement should not be ignored.
Laxatives are not necessary for the mildly constipation people. But for those who havemadediet and lifestyle changes but still keep consti pating, doctors may prescribe laxatives or enemas for a restricted time.②
These treatments can help restore a chronically sluggish bowel. For children, short-term treatment with laxatives, along with retraining to build regular bowel habits, helps a lot.
Other treat ments may be directed at a specific cause. For example, the doctor may suggestdiscontinuing medication or performing surgery to correct an anorectal problem such as rectal prolapse.

【翻译】
含有足够纤维（每天20至35克）的饮食有助于形成柔软、笨重的大便。倾向于便秘的人需要限制含有少量或不含纤维的食物，如冰淇淋、奶酪、肉类和加工食品。某些生活方式的改变可以帮助治疗和预防便秘，包括喝足够的水和其他液体，如水果和蔬菜汁，参与日常锻炼，并保留足够的时间来刺激肠道运动。此外，不应忽视排便的冲动。轻度便秘的人不需要使用泻药。但对于那些已经改变饮食和生活方式但仍然坚持服药的人，医生可能会在有限的时间内开出泻药或灌肠剂。②这些治疗可以帮助恢复慢性缓慢的肠道。对于儿童来说，使用泻药进行短期治疗，以及重新训练以养成规律的排便习惯，有很大的帮助。其他治疗方法可能针对特定原因。例如，医生可能会建议中断药物治疗或进行手术以纠正直肠脱垂等肛门直肠问题。

Daily Language
1. I haven'thad a bowl movement for three days and I am feeling bloated and uncomfortable.
我已经三天没有解⼤便了。我现在感觉腹胀, 很不舒服。
2. Sometimes I bleed when I relieve the bowels.
当我⼤便时有时要出⾎。
3. Uset he suppositories and laxative. They will helpbowl movement and relieve pain.
使⽤栓剂和缓泻药。它们有助于通便并同时缓解疼痛。
①
②

尽管 便秘 的治疗 要根 据便秘 原因、 严重 度和持 续时 间, 但 在⼤ 多数情 况下, 饮 ⻝ 和⽣ 活 ⽅式 的 改变 将 有助 于
减 轻便秘 的症 状和预 防便秘 。
对 那些已 经改 变饮⻝ 及⽣活 习惯 却仍然 便秘 的⼈, 医⽣ 可能会 在⼀段 时间 内给予 缓泻 剂和灌 肠剂 治疗。

110

Unit 28

【原文】
Pneumonia
1. List the types of pneumonia;
2. Expla in the supportive treatments for pneumonia;
3. State the nursing diagnosis and nursing goals for pneumonia patients;
4. State the nursing care of pneumonia.

【翻译】
肺炎1.列出肺炎的类型； 2.解释肺炎的支持治疗； 3.阐述肺炎患者的姐妹护理和护理目标； 4.阐述肺炎的护理。

【原文】
Pneumonia is an infection of the lung that affects 1 out of 100 people annually. It was the No. 1 cause of death until 1936. Since then, the use of antibiotics brough t it under control.
In China, there are approximately 2. 5 million cases of pneumonia peryear and around 125
thousand persons die of the disease,
ranking as the f if thleading cause of death ①.

【翻译】
肺炎是一种肺部感染，每年影响100人中的1人。直到1936年，它是第一大死因。从那时起，抗生素的使用使它得到了控制。在中国，每年约有250万例肺炎病例，约有12.5万人死于这种疾病，位列第五大死因①。

【原文】
Pneumonia out breakstend to occur in spring and winter.
Pneumonia is not a single disease. It can have over thirty different causes. The most common ones include bacterial pneumonia, viral pneumonia, mycoplasma pneumonia, and pneumonia associated with aspiration of foreign substances②.

【翻译】
肺炎爆发往往发生在春季和冬季。肺炎不是一种单一的疾病。它可能有三十多种不同的原因。最常见的包括细菌性肺炎、病毒性肺炎、支原体肺炎和与吸入异物相关的肺炎②。

⽀原体肺炎和吸⼊异物相关的肺炎

【原文】
Pneumococcus is the most common cause of bacterial pneumonia. Bacterial pneumonia can attack anyone from infants through the veryold. However, those who may be at higher risk for pneumococcal disease are usually those who are 65 years of age or older, children more than
2 years of age and adults who have chronic illnesses, such as heart, lung, and kidney disease,
cancer, diabetes,
alcoholism,
HIV infection, or

【翻译】
肺炎球菌是细菌性肺炎最常见的原因。细菌性肺炎可以攻击从婴儿到老年人的任何人。然而，肺炎球菌疾病风险较高的人通常是65岁或以上的人、2岁以上的儿童和患有慢性疾病的成年人，如心脏病、肺病和肾病、癌症、糖尿病、酗酒、艾滋病毒感染，或

与免疫系统受损相关的疾病

【原文】
other conditions associated with an impaired immune system ③. The onset of pneumococcal pneumonia can vary from gradual to sudden. Signs and symptoms include: chills, chattering, chest pain, cough, fever, rapid and shallow respiration ④, nasal flaring ⑤, retractions, and dyspnea. ⿐翼煽动、回缩和呼吸困难
Most cases of viral pneumonia are mild and last a short time, butsome cases are more serious and require hospitalization. People who are at risk for more serious viral pneumonia typically have impaired immune systems such as young children (especially those with heart defects), the elderly, people with HIV, and people taking medications to inhibit their immune systems in the treatment of autoimmune disorders. Symptoms of viral pneumonia
①
②
③
④
⑤

【翻译】
与免疫系统受损相关的其他疾病③。肺炎球菌性肺炎的发病可能从渐进式到突然式不等。体征和症状包括：寒战、喋喋不休、胸痛、咳嗽、发烧、快速和浅呼吸④、鼻腔张力⑤、缩回和呼吸困难。⿐翼煽动、回缩和呼吸困难 大多数病毒性肺炎病例为轻度，持续时间短，但有些病例更严重，需要住院治疗。面临更严重病毒性肺炎风险的人通常免疫系统受损，如幼儿（特别是心脏病患者）、老年人、艾滋病毒感染者和服用药物抑制免疫系统治疗自身免疫性疾病的人。病毒性肺炎症状① ② ③ ④ ⑤

在 疾病死 亡原 因中列 第五位 。
异 物。
其 他与免 疫系 统功能 损伤有 关的 疾病。
呼 吸浅、 快。
⿐ 煽。

112

Unit 28

【原文】
Pneumonia include: fever, a dry cough, headache, muscle pain, weakness, shortness of breath, soret hroat, and sweating.
Mycoplasma pneumonia is an infection of the lungs caused by mycoplasma. Mycoplasmas are the smallest free-living agents of disease in humankind, unclassif ied as bacteria or viruses,
but having characteristics of both.① Mycoplasma pneumoniae usually affects people younger than 40. The symptoms are generally mild. But in some people, they may progress to more severe symptoms. Common symptoms include the following: headache, fever, chills,
excessive sweating, dry cough, chest pain, and sorethroat.
Other kinds of pneumonia: Various special pneumonias are caused by the inhalation of food, liquid, gases or dust, and by fungi. Pneu mocystiscarinii pneumonia (PCP) ②

【翻译】
肺炎包括：发烧、干咳、头痛、肌肉疼痛、无力、呼吸急促、喉咙痛和出汗。支原体肺炎是由支原体引起的肺部感染。支原体是人类最小的自由存活的疾病因子，未分类为细菌或病毒，但具有两者的特征。①肺炎支原体通常影响40岁以下的人群。症状一般较轻。但在某些人中，他们可能会发展成更严重的症状。常见症状包括：头痛、发烧、寒战、出汗过多、干咳、胸痛和喉咙痛。其他类型的肺炎：各种特殊肺炎是由吸入食物、液体、气体或灰尘以及真菌引起的。肺囊肿是II型肺炎（ PCP ）中的CAR ②

is

【原文】
caused by an organism believed to be a fungus. In many patients, PCP is the first sign of AIDS.
Antibiotics as a form of pneumonia treatment can cure bacterial and mycoplasma pneumonia most of the time, butthere is no effective treat mentyet for viral pneumonia.
Antibiotics can lower body temperature within a day or two and produce a dramatic recovery.
After temperature drops, medication must be continued for 4 or 5 days according to physician's i nstructions③,
otherwise the pneumonia may recur. Recurrence can be more serious than the first attack. Besides an tibiotics, patients can also be given supportive
氧⽓以缓解呼吸困难或发绀
treatment ④: proper diet, oxygen to relieve dyspnea or cyanosis, and medication to ease chest pain. Adequate rest is important to maintain progress toward full recovery and to avoid relapse.
The nursing diagnosis for pneumonia includes i m paired gas exchange,
airway clearance,
hyperthermia,
i nef fective breathing pattern,
ineffective risk for fluid volume deficit, and activity i ntolerance.⑤
Nursing goals for pneumonia are: promote rest, maintain patent airway, control fever,
prevent dehydration, ease breathing difficulty, provide nutrition, monitor respiratory efforts,
reduce anxiety and detect complications early.
Nursing care of alltypes of pneumonia is basically the same. The client needs rest to prevent exhaustion. The nurse must organize her work so that she does not disturbt he client unnecessarily. The patient must be turned and repositioned frequently to avoid pooling of secretion.⑥
Remove heavyclothing and blankets and give sponge ba thing ⑦ when the client is flushed with fever. Encourage the client to takemore fluids to prevent dehydration. Vital
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥
⑦

【翻译】
是由一种被认为是真菌的有机体引起的。在许多患者中， PCP是艾滋病的第一个迹象。抗生素作为肺炎治疗的一种形式，大部分时间可以治愈细菌性和支原体性肺炎，但目前还没有有效的治疗病毒性肺炎的方法。抗生素可以在一两天内降低体温，并产生显着的恢复。体温下降后，必须按照医嘱③继续用药4或5天，'否则可能会复发肺炎。复发可能比第一次发作更严重。除抗生素外，患者还可以给予支持性氧⽓以缓解呼吸困难或发绀治疗④ ：适当的饮食，氧气缓解呼吸困难或发凉，药物缓解胸痛。充足的休息对于保持完全康复和避免复发非常重要。肺炎的护理诊断包括气体交换受损、气道间隙、高温、缺陷性破坏模式、液体体积不足的无效风险和活动不耐受。⑤肺炎的护理目标是：促进休息，主干气道通畅，控制发热，预防脱水，缓解呼吸困难，提供营养，监测呼吸努力，减少焦虑并及早发现并发症。所有类型肺炎的护理基本相同。客户需要休息以防止疲劳。护士必须组织她的工作，以免不必要地打扰客户。必须经常将患者转向并重新定位，以避免分泌物汇集。⑥当客户发烧潮红时，脱掉厚重的衣服和毯子，用海绵沐浴⑦。鼓励客户服用更多液体以防止脱水。生命① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑥ ⑦

它 (⽀原 体) 既不是 细菌也 不是 病毒, 但却 具有两 者的 特点。
卡 ⽒肺囊 ⾍肺 炎, 缩 写为 PCP 。
遵 医嘱。
⽀ 持疗法 。
肺炎 的护理 诊断 包括: ⽓体 交换受 损、 清理 呼 吸道 ⽆ 效、 体 温 过 ⾼、 低 效型 呼 吸 形 态、 有 体液 不 ⾜ 的 危险 、
活 动⽆耐 ⼒等 。
(护⼠ 应) 经 常为 病⼈翻 身并 改变体 位以防 ⽌分 泌物的 淤积 。
海 绵擦浴 。

113

【原文】
signs and chest sounds are monitored to assess the progress of the disease and to detect early signs of complications.

【翻译】
监测体征和胸音，以评估疾病进展并发现并发症的早期体征。

【原文】
Daily Language
1. Your daughter must take these medicines in time. Even after the temperature returns to normal, she may need to continue to take the medication for 4 to 5 days according to the doctor's prescription, otherwise the temperature may shoot up again.
您⼥⼉应按时服药。即使在体温恢复正 常以后, 她还 要继续 服药 4 ⾄ 5 天, 否 则
温度可能再次升⾼。
2. Besides, what your daughter needs mostnow is adequate rest and a balanced diet.
So, it is helpful to let your daughter have a good sleep and eatwell.
另外, 您⼥⼉现在最需要的是好好休息和均衡的营养。所以, 您应 该让她 睡好觉,
多吃点。

【翻译】
日常用语1.您的女儿必须及时服用这些药物。即使体温恢复正常，她也可能需要根据医生的预先检查结果继续服药4到5天'，否则体温可能会再次上升。您⼥⼉应按时服药。即使在体温恢复正 常以后, 她还 要继续 服药 4 ⾄ 5天, 否 则 温度可能再次升⾼。 2.此外，您女儿现在最需要的是充足的休息和均衡的饮食。因此，让您的女儿睡个好觉，吃得好是有帮助的。另外,您⼥⼉现在最需要的是好好休息和均衡的营养。所以,您应 该让她 睡好觉, 多吃点。

Vocabulary
1. annually [蔠 nj u蓈l i] adv. ⼀年⼀次, 每年
2. out break [蔠
蓇u tbreik] n. (战争的) 爆发, (疾病的) 发作
3. mycoplasma [蔠ma i k蓈u蔠p lz m蓈] n. ⽀原体, ⽀原菌
4. aspiration [蔠 sp蓈
蔠re 蓌
i 蓈n] n. 吸⽓
5. pneumococcus [蔠n j u蓎m蓈
蔠k蓋k蓈s] n. 肺炎球菌
6. alcoholism [蔠 l k蓈h蓋l iz蓈m] n. 酒精中毒
7. chattering [蔠t蓌 t蓈r i蓓] 咔哒声
8. nasal [蔠nei z (蓈) l] adj. ⿐⼦的; ⿐中的
9. retraction [r蔠
i tr k蓌
蓈n] n. 收回
10. hospitalization [蔠h蓋sp i 蓈
tl a蔠
i zei蓌
蓈n] n. 医院收容, 住院治疗
11. defect [di蔠f ekt] n. 缺陷
12. fungus [蔠f蓊蓓蓐
蓈s] (pl. fungi) n. 真菌
13. organism [蔠
蓋
蓎
蓐蓈n iz蓈m] n. ⽣物体, 有机体
14. recur [r蔠
i k蓈
蓎] v. 复发
recurrence [r蔠
i k蓊r蓈ns] n. 复发
15. cyanosis [蔠sa 蓈
i 蔠n蓈usis] n. 发绀, ⻘紫
16. relapse [r蔠
i lps] n. 复发 v i. 旧病复发
17. sponge [sp蓊n d蓏] n. (外科⽤的) 棉球, 纱布

114
