Day 19 | Unit 37

Unit 37

【原文】
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs)
1. State the names of common STDs;
2. Tell the transmission route of STDs;
3. List the ways to prevent the spread of STDs;
4. Identify the goals of care for STDs patients.

【翻译】
性传播疾病（STDs） 1.列出常见性病的名称； 2.告知性传播疾病的传播路线； 3.列出防止性传播疾病传播的方法； 4.确定性病患者的护理目标。

【原文】
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)
are a diverse group of in fections acquired through sexual activity with an in fected person.①
Examples of STDs are syphilis,
gonorrhea, chancroid, granuloma inguinale, human papillomavirus, herpes simplex virus,
chlamydial infections, and t richomonal vaginitis. Acquired i mmunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) ② is not a trueSTD, butone of its transmission routes is by sexual in tercourse③.
Certain elements and behaviors contribute to the transmission of STDs. Examples of these include: unknown carriers, casualsex practices, absence of lawsthat require the reporting of allSTDs, unfaithful sexual partner, length of time between exposure to an STD and the appearance of symptoms, failure to recognize the signs and symptoms of an STD followed by failure to seek early treatment as well as to refrain from sexual activity ④
until treatment is complete, lack of proper knowledge regarding STDs and their prevention, and failure of the sexually active person to heed the warnings about STDs or adhere to methods of prevention.
Many clients with STDs might experience pain, hyperthermia, diarrhea, anxiety, and fear. Some of them might face altered sexuality patterns,
highrisk for in fection transmission, ineffective i ndiv idual coping, noncom pliance, and highrisk for ineffective management of therapeutic regimen related to insufficient knowledge of transmission, treatment, and prevention.⑤
The major goals of nursing may include relief of pain or discomfort, relief of symptoms, control of infection, prevention of transmission,
and avoidance of another infection. To make these goals measurable, more specific criteria
①
②
③
④
⑤
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs)
must be added as follows.
Pain is a common symptom for clients with STDs. Reassure the clien tthat the pa in or discomfort is relieved when the in fection is eradicated.① Report severe discomfort or pain to the physician because an analgesic may be necessary. SomeSTDs, for example gonorrhea and nongonorrheal uret hritis, invade the genitourinary tract and cause dysuria and difficulty in urinating. These symptoms usually disappear a fewdays after treatment begins.
Fever may be associated with someSTDs and may persist until the infection is brough t under control. Report any temperature elevation at the time of the physical assessment as well as a history of a fever to the physician. An antipyretic is usually effective in con trolling a fever.
Diarrhea may occur as an adverse effect of some an timicrobial agents, especially when the drug is taken orally over an extended period. Until the in fection is controlled, instruct these clients to increase their fluid intake as well as attain a normal food intake.②
If diarrhea is severe, instruct the client to notify the physician.
People might express various emotions when they discover that they have an STD. They may be unable to accept the diagnosis, experience varying degrees of anxiety, fear the consequences that the infection may have on their marriage or their sexual partners, and fear that the infection may not be cured. Moreover, a client may have difficulty explaining or discussing this problem. A nurse should establish an at mosphere of mutual trust with the client. Allow clients to express the fears, anxieties, and emotions that accompany them, try to identify any discomfort the client may have, and at tempt to dispel those discomfort by means of explanation, education, and, possibly, referral to a social agency, such as a marriage counseling service or a group that deals with teens with an STD.
All clients with STDs are capable of transmitting the infection, so they need to refrain from sexual activity until the infection is cured. When the STD cannot be cured and periodically recurs, as for example, an HSV infection, encourage the client to use a condom. This alteration in sexual activity may not be accepted by all persons; ③
therefore, emphasize the importance of changing the pattern of sexual activity. Advise these clients to return for examination and laboratory tests to be sure they are no longer able to transmit the in fection to others.④
Many people have wrong or no information about STDs. Some people disregard the information they do receive. A nurse should first determine what these clients know and then add to their knowledge or correct any misinformation. Give information or explanations in a positive manner to help the client understand the importance of seeking treatment, completing a course of therapy, preventing the transmission of the infection to others, and using methods to avoid infection in the future. Somecitieshavehot lines that adolescents and young adults
①
②
③
④
with STDs can call for answers to their questions and that can help people with an STDget in touch with a support group. The phonenumbers of these hot lines can be given to the client.

【翻译】
性传播疾病（STDs）是通过与感染者的性活动获得的多种感染。①性病的例子有梅毒、淋病、卵巢囊肿、腹股沟肉芽肿、人乳头瘤病毒、单纯疱疹病毒、衣原体感染和滴虫性阴道炎。获得性免疫缺陷综合征（ AIDS ） ②不是真正的性病，但其传播途径之一是性交③。某些元素和行为有助于性传播疾病的传播。这些例子包括：未知携带者、随意性行为、没有要求报告所有性传播疾病的法律、不忠实的性行为、从暴露于性传播疾病到出现症状之间的时间长度，未能识别性传播疾病的体征和症状，随后未能寻求早期治疗以及在治疗完成之前避免性活动④ ，缺乏有关性传播疾病及其预防的适当知识，以及性活跃者未能注意有关性传播疾病的警告或遵守预防方法。许多性病患者可能会感到疼痛、体温过高、腹泻、焦虑和恐惧。他们中的一些人可能面临性行为模式改变，感染传播的高风险，无效的习惯性应对，不听话，以及与传播，治疗知识不足相关的治疗方案管理无效的高风险，⑤护理的主要目标可能包括缓解疼痛或不适、缓解症状、控制感染、预防传播和避免另一种感染。为了使这些目标可衡量，必须按以下方式添加更具体的标准① ② ③ ④ ⑤性传播疾病（STDs）。疼痛是性病患者的常见症状。向客户保证，当感染被根除时，疼痛或不适会得到缓解。①向医生报告严重的不适或疼痛，因为可能需要止痛药。一些性病，例如淋病和非淋病性尿道炎，会侵入泌尿生殖道并导致排尿困难和排尿困难。这些症状通常在治疗开始后几天消失。发烧可能与某些性病有关，并可能持续存在，直到感染得到控制。在体能评估时向医生报告任何体温升高以及发烧史。抗火热抽搐通常能有效控制发烧。腹泻可能作为某些抗菌药物的不良反应发生，特别是当药物在较长时间内口服时。在感染得到控制之前，指导这些客户增加液体摄入量并达到正常的食物摄入量。②如果腹泻是严重的，指示委托人通知医生。当人们发现自己患有性病时，可能会表达各种情绪。他们可能无法接受诊断，经历不同程度的焦虑，担心感染可能对他们的婚姻或性伴侣产生的后果，并担心感染可能无法治愈。此外，客户可能难以解释或讨论这个问题。护士应与客户建立相互信任的氛围。允许客户表达伴随他们的恐惧、焦虑和情绪，尝试识别客户可能有的任何不适，并试图通过解释、教育以及可能转介给社会机构（如婚姻咨询服务或处理性病青少年的团体）来消除这些不适。所有患有性病的客户都能够传播感染，因此在感染治愈之前，他们需要避免性活动。当性病无法治愈并定期复发（例如HSV感染）时，鼓励客户使用避孕套。并非所有人都能接受这种性活动的改变；③因此，强调改变性活动模式的重要性。建议这些客户返回进行检查和实验室检查，以确保他们不再能够将感染传播给其他人。④许多人对性传播疾病的信息有误或没有任何信息。有些人无视他们收到的信息。护士应首先确定这些客户知道什么，然后增加他们的知识或纠正任何错误信息。以积极的方式提供信息或解释，帮助客户了解寻求治疗、完成疗程、防止感染传播给他人以及使用方法避免将来感染的重要性。一些城市设有热线，有性病的青少年和年轻人① ② ③ ④可以打电话询问他们的问题，这可以帮助有性病的人与支持小组取得联系。这些热线的电话号码可以提供给客户。

【原文】
Questions on Reading
1. What can contribute to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)?
2. What are the ways of preventing and con trolling the spread of STDs?
3. What are the major goals of nursing the clients with STDs?
4. Can you list the nursing interventions for those problems such as pain, hyperthermia,
diarrhea, anxiety, fear, and knowledge deficit?
152

【翻译】
关于阅读的问题1.哪些因素可能导致性传播疾病（STDs）的传播？ 2.有哪些方法可以预防和控制性传播疾病的传播？ 3.护理患有性病的客户的主要目标是什么？ 4.您能否列出这些问题的护理干预措施，如疼痛、高热、腹泻、焦虑、恐惧和知识缺陷？ 152
